To understand the organization of the processor, let us consider the requirements placed on the processor, the things that it must do:

■ Fetch instruction: The processor reads an instruction from memory (register, cache, main memory).

■ Interpret instruction: The instruction is decoded to determine what action is required.

■ Fetch data: The execution of an instruction may require reading data from memory or an I/O module.

■ Process data: The execution of an instruction may require performing some arithmetic or logical operation on data.

■ Write data: The results of an execution may require writing data to memory or an I/O module.

To do these things, it should be clear that the processor needs to store some data temporarily. It must remember the location of the last instruction so that it can know where to get the next instruction. It needs to store instructions and data temporarily while an instruction is being executed. In other words, the processor needs a small internal memory.

Figure below is a simplified view of a processor, indicating its connection to the rest of the system via the system bus.

A similar interface would be needed for any of the interconnection structures described in Chapter 3. The reader will recall that the major components of the processor are an arithmetic and logic unit (ALU) and a control unit (CU). The ALU does the actual computation or processing of data. The control unit controls the movement of data and instructions into and out of the processor and controls the operation of the ALU. In addition, the figure shows a minimal internal memory, consisting of a set of storage locations, called registers.

Figure above is a slightly more detailed view of the processor. The data transfer and logic control paths are indicated, including an element labeled internal processor bus. This element is needed to transfer data between the various registers and the ALU because the ALU in fact operates only on data in the internal processor memory. The figure also shows typical basic elements of the ALU. Note the similarity between the internal structure of the computer as a whole and the internal structure of the processor. In both cases, there is a small collection of major elements (computer: processor, I/O, memory; processor: control unit, ALU, registers) connected by data paths.