In moudle 3, we described the processor’s instruction cycle. To recall, an instruction cycle includes the following stages:

■ Fetch: Read the next instruction from memory into the processor.

■ Execute: Interpret the opcode and perform the indicated operation.

■ Interrupt: If interrupts are enabled and an interrupt has occurred, save the current process state and service the interrupt.

We are now in a position to elaborate somewhat on the instruction cycle. First, we must introduce one additional stage, known as the indirect cycle.

The Indirect Cycle

We have seen, in module 13, that the execution of an instruction may involve one or more operands in memory, each of which requires a memory access. Further, if indirect addressing is used, then additional memory accesses are required.We can think of the fetching of indirect addresses as one more instruction stages. The result is shown in the figure below.

The main line of activity consists of alternating instruction fetch and instruction execution activities. After an instruction is fetched, it is examined to determine if any indirect addressing is involved. If so, the required operands are fetched using indirect addressing. Following execution, an interrupt may be processed before the next instruction fetch.

Another way to view this process is shown in the previous figure. This illustrates more correctly the nature of the instruction cycle. Once an instruction is fetched, its operand specifiers must be identified. Each input operand in memory is then fetched, and this process may require indirect addressing. Register- based operands need not be fetched. Once the opcode is executed, a similar process may be needed to store the result in main memory.

Data Flow

The exact sequence of events during an instruction cycle depends on the design of the processor. We can, however, indicate in general terms what must happen. Let us assume that a processor that employs a memory address register (MAR), a memory buffer register (MBR), a program counter (PC), and an instruction register (IR).

During the fetch cycle, an instruction is read from memory. Figure above shows the flow of data during this cycle. The PC contains the address of the next instruction to be fetched. This address is moved to the MAR and placed on the address bus. The control unit requests a memory read, and the result is placed on the data bus and copied into the MBR and then moved to the IR. Meanwhile, the PC is incremented by 1, preparatory for the next fetch.

Once the fetch cycle is over, the control unit examines the contents of the IR to determine if it contains an operand specifier using indirect addressing. If so, an indirect cycle is performed. As shown in the next image, this is a simple cycle. The right- most N bits of the MBR, which contain the address reference, are transferred to the MAR. Then the control unit requests a memory read, to get the desired address of the operand into the MBR.

The fetch and indirect cycles are simple and predictable. The execute cycle takes many forms; the form depends on which of the various machine instructions is in the IR. This cycle may involve transferring data among registers, read or write from memory or I/O, and/or the invocation of the ALU.

Like the fetch and indirect cycles, the interrupt cycle is simple and predictable (Figure below). The current contents of the PC must be saved so that the processor can resume normal activity after the interrupt. Thus, the contents of the PC are transferred to the MBR to be written into memory. The special memory location reserved for this purpose is loaded into the MAR from the control unit. It might, for example, be a stack pointer. The PC is loaded with the address of the interrupt routine. As a result, the next instruction cycle will begin by fetching the appropriate instruction.