The x86 organization has evolved dramatically over the years. In this section we examine some of the details of the most recent processor organizations, concentrating on common elements in single processors. Module16 looks at superscalar aspects of the x86, and module 18 examines the multicore organization. An overview of the Pentium 4 processor organization is depicted in module 4.

Register Organization

The register organization includes the following types of registers (Table above):

■ General: There are eight 32-bit general- purpose registers. These may be used for all types of x86 instructions; they can also hold operands for address calculations. In addition, some of these registers also serve special purposes. For example, string instructions use the contents of the ECX, ESI, and EDI registers as operands without having to reference these registers explicitly in the instruction. As a result, a number of instructions can be encoded more compactly. In 64-bit mode, there are sixteen 64-bit general- purpose registers.

■ Segment: The six 16-bit segment registers contain segment selectors, which index into segment tables, as discussed in Chapter 8. The code segment (CS) register references the segment containing the instruction being executed. The stack segment (SS) register references the segment containing a user- visible stack. The remaining segment registers (DS, ES, FS, GS) enable the user to reference up to four separate data segments at a time.

■ Flags: The 32-bit EFLAGS register contains condition codes and various mode bits. In 64-bit mode, this register is extended to 64 bits and referred to as RFLAGS. In the current architecture definition, the upper 32 bits of RFLAGS are unused.

■ Instruction pointer: Contains the address of the current instruction. There are also registers specifically devoted to the floating- point unit:

■ Numeric: Each register holds an extended- precision 80-bit floating- point number. There are eight registers that function as a stack, with push and pop operations available in the instruction set.

■ Control: The 16-bit control register contains bits that control the operation of the floating- point unit, including the type of rounding control; single, double, or extended precision; and bits to enable or disable various exception conditions.

■ Status: The 16-bit status register contains bits that reflect the current state of the floating- point unit, including a 3-bit pointer to the top of the stack; condition codes reporting the outcome of the last operation; and exception flags.

■ Tag word: This 16-bit register contains a 2-bit tag for each floating- point numeric register, which indicates the nature of the contents of the corresponding register. The four possible values are valid, zero, special (NaN, infinity, denormalized), and empty. These tags enable programs to check the contents of a numeric register without performing complex decoding of the actual data in the register. For example, when a context switch is made, the processor need not save any floating- point registers that are empty.

The use of most of the aforementioned registers is easily understood. Let us elaborate briefly on several of the registers.

EFLAGS REGISTER

The EFLAGS register (Figure below) indicates the condition of the processor and helps to control its operation.

It includes the six condition codes defined in module12(carry, parity, auxiliary, zero, sign, overflow), which report the results of an integer operation. In addition, there are bits in the register that may be referred to as control bits:

■ Trap flag (TF): When set, causes an interrupt after the execution of each instruction. This is used for debugging.

■ Interrupt enable flag (IF): When set, the processor will recognize external interrupts.

■ Direction flag (DF): Determines whether string processing instructions increment or decrement the 16-bit half- registers SI and DI (for 16-bit operations) or the 32-bit registers ESI and EDI (for 32-bit operations).

■ I/O privilege flag (IOPL): When set, causes the processor to generate an exception on all accesses to I/O devices during protected- mode operation.

■ Resume flag (RF): Allows the programmer to disable debug exceptions so that the instruction can be restarted after a debug exception without immediately causing another debug exception.

■ Alignment check (AC): Activates if a word or doubleword is addressed on a nonword or nondoubleword boundary.

■ Identification flag (ID): If this bit can be set and cleared, then this processor supports the processorID instruction. This instruction provides information about the vendor, family, and model.

In addition, there are 4 bits that relate to operating mode. The Nested Task (NT) flag indicates that the current task is nested within another task in protected- mode operation. The Virtual Mode (VM) bit allows the programmer to enable or disable virtual 8086 mode, which determines whether the processor runs as an 8086 machine. The Virtual Interrupt Flag (VIF) and Virtual Interrupt Pending (VIP) flag are used in a multitasking environment.

CONTROL REGISTERS

The x86 employs four control registers (register CR1 is unused) to control various aspects of processor operation (Figure below).

All of the registers except CR0 are either 32 bits or 64 bits long, depending on whether the implementation supports the x86 64-bit architecture. The CR0 register contains system control flags, which control modes or indicate states that apply generally to the processor rather than to the execution of an individual task. The flags are as follows:

■ Protection Enable (PE): Enable/disable protected mode of operation.

■ Monitor Coprocessor (MP): Only of interest when running programs from earlier machines on the x86; it relates to the presence of an arithmetic coprocessor.

■ Emulation (EM): Set when the processor does not have a floating- point unit, and causes an interrupt when an attempt is made to execute floating- point instructions.

■ Task Switched (TS): Indicates that the processor has switched tasks.

■ Extension Type (ET): Not used on the Pentium and later machines; used to indicate support of math coprocessor instructions on earlier machines.

■ Numeric Error (NE): Enables the standard mechanism for reporting floating- point errors on external bus lines.

■ Write Protect (WP): When this bit is clear, read- only user- level pages can be written by a supervisor process. This feature is useful for supporting process creation in some operating systems.

■ Alignment Mask (AM): Enables/disables alignment checking.

■ Not Write Through (NW): Selects mode of operation of the data cache. When this bit is set, the data cache is inhibited from cache write- through operations.

■ Cache Disable (CD): Enables/disables the internal cache fill mechanism.

■ Paging (PG): Enables/disables paging.

When paging is enabled, the CR2 and CR3 registers are valid. The CR2 register holds the 32-bit linear address of the last page accessed before a page fault interrupt. The leftmost 20 bits of CR3 hold the 20 most significant bits of the base address of the page directory; the remainder of the address contains zeros. Two bits of CR3 are used to drive pins that control the operation of an external cache. The page-
level cache disable (PCD) enables or disables the external cache, and the page- level writes transparent (PWT) bit controls write through in the external cache. CR4 contains additional control bits.

MMX REGISTERS

Recall from module 10 that the x86 MMX capability makes use of several 64-bit data types. The MMX instructions make use of 3-bit register address fields, so that eight MMX registers are supported. In fact, the processor does not include specific MMX registers. Rather, the processor uses an aliasing technique (Figure below).

The existing floating- point registers are used to store MMX values. Specifically, the low- order 64 bits (mantissa) of each floating- point register are used to form the eight MMX registers. Thus, the older 32-bit x86 architecture is easily extended to support the MMX capability. Some key characteristics of the MMX use of these registers are as follows:

■ Recall that the floating- point registers are treated as a stack for floating- point operations. For MMX operations, these same registers are accessed directly.

■ The first time that an MMX instruction is executed after any floating- point operations, the FP tag word is marked valid. This reflects the change from stack operation to direct register addressing.

■ The EMMS (Empty MMX State) instruction sets bits of the FP tag word to indicate that all registers are empty. It is important that the programmer insert this instruction at the end of an MMX code block so that subsequent floating- point operations function properly.

■ When a value is written to an MMX register, bits [79:64] of the corresponding FP register (sign and exponent bits) are set to all ones. This sets the value in the FP register to NaN (not a number) or infinity when viewed as a floating- point value. This ensures that an MMX data value will not look like a valid floating- point value.

Interrupt Processing

Interrupt processing within a processor is a facility provided to support the operating system. It allows an application program to be suspended, in order that a variety of interrupt conditions can be serviced and later resumed.

INTERRUPTS AND EXCEPTIONS

Two classes of events cause the x86 to suspend execution of the current instruction stream and respond to the event: interrupts and exceptions. In both cases, the processor saves the context of the current process and transfers to a predefined routine to service the condition. An interrupt is generated by a signal from hardware, and it may occur at random times during the execution of a program. An exception is generated from software, and it is provoked by the execution of an instruction. There are two sources of interrupts and two sources of exceptions:

1. Interrupts

■ Maskable interrupts: Received on the processor’s INTR pin. The processor does not recognize a maskable interrupt unless the interrupt enable flag (IF) is set.

■ Nonmaskable interrupts: Received on the processor’s NMI pin. Recognition of such interrupts cannot be prevented.

2. Exceptions

■ Processor- detected exceptions: Results when the processor encounters an error while attempting to execute an instruction.

■ Programmed exceptions: These are instructions that generate an exception (e.g., INTO, INT3, INT, and BOUND).

INTERRUPT VECTOR TABLE

Interrupt processing on the x86 uses the interrupt vector table. Every type of interrupt is assigned a number, and this number is used to index into the interrupt vector table. This table contains 256 32-bit interrupt vectors, which is the address (segment and offset) of the interrupt service routine for that interrupt number.

Table above shows the assignment of numbers in the interrupt vector table; shaded entries represent interrupts, while nonshaded entries are exceptions. The NMI hardware interrupt is type 2. INTR hardware interrupts are assigned numbers in the range of 32 to 255; when an INTR interrupt is generated, it must be accompanied on the bus with the interrupt vector number for this interrupt. The remaining vector numbers are used for exceptions.

If more than one exception or interrupt is pending, the processor services them in a predictable order. The location of vector numbers within the table does not reflect priority. Instead, priority among exceptions and interrupts is organized into five classes. In descending order of priority, these are

■ Class 1: Traps on the previous instruction (vector number 1)

■ Class 2: External interrupts (2, 32–255)

■ Class 3: Faults from fetching next instruction (3, 14)

■ Class 4: Faults from decoding the next instruction (6, 7)

■ Class 5: Faults on executing an instruction (0, 4, 5, 8, 10–14, 16, 17)

INTERRUPT HANDLING

Just as with a transfer of execution using a CALL instruction, a transfer to an interrupt- handling routine uses the system stack to store the processor state. When an interrupt occurs and is recognized by the processor, a sequence of events takes place:

1. If the transfer involves a change of privilege level, then the current stack segment register and the current extended stack pointer (ESP) register are pushed onto the stack.

2. The current value of the EFLAGS register is pushed onto the stack.

3. Both the interrupt (IF) and trap (TF) flags are cleared. This disables INTR interrupts and the trap or single- step feature.

4. The current code segment (CS) pointer and the current instruction pointer (IP or EIP) are pushed onto the stack.

5. If the interrupt is accompanied by an error code, then the error code is pushed onto the stack.

6. The interrupt vector contents are fetched and loaded into the CS and IP or EIP registers. Execution continues from the interrupt service routine.

To return from an interrupt, the interrupt service routine executes an IRET instruction. This causes all of the values saved on the stack to be restored; execution resumes from the point of the interrupt.