In this section, we look at some of the key elements of the ARM architecture and organization. We defer a discussion of more complex aspects of organization and pipelining until Chapter 16. For the discussion in this section and in Chapter 16, it is useful to keep in mind key characteristics of the ARM architecture. ARM is primarily a RISC system with the following notable attributes:

■ A moderate array of uniform registers, more than are found on some CISC systems but fewer than are found on many RISC systems.

■ A load/store model of data processing, in which operations only perform on operands in registers and not directly in memory. All data must be loaded into registers before an operation can be performed; the result can then be used for further processing or stored into memory.

■ A uniform fixed- length instruction of 32 bits for the standard set and 16 bits for the Thumb instruction set.

■ To make each data processing instruction more flexible, either a shift or rotation can preprocess one of the source registers. To efficiently support this feature, there are separate arithmetic logic unit (ALU) and shifter units.

■ A small number of addressing modes with all load/store addressees determined from registers and instruction fields. Indirect or indexed addressing involving values in memory are not used.

■ Auto- increment and auto- decrement addressing modes are used to improve the operation of program loops.

■ Conditional execution of instructions minimizes the need for conditional branch instructions, thereby improving pipeline efficiency, because pipeline flushing is reduced.

Processor Organization

The ARM processor organization varies substantially from one implementation to the next, particularly when based on different versions of the ARM architecture. However, it is useful for the discussion in this section to present a simplified, generic ARM organization, which is illustrated in Figure below. In this figure, the arrows indicate the flow of data. Each box represents a functional hardware unit or a storage unit.

Data are exchanged with the processor from external memory through a data bus. The value transferred is either a data item, as a result of a load or store instruction, or an instruction fetch. Fetched instructions pass through an instruction decoder before execution, under control of a control unit. The latter includes pipeline logic and provides control signals (not shown) to all the hardware elements of the processor. Data items are placed in the register file, consisting of a set of 32-bit registers. Byte or halfword items treated as twos- complement numbers are sign-
extended to 32 bits.

ARM data processing instructions typically have two source registers, Rn and Rm, and a single result or destination register, Rd. The source register values feed into the ALU or a separate multiply unit that makes use of an additional register to accumulate partial results. The ARM processor also includes a hardware unit that can shift or rotate the Rm value before it enters the ALU. This shift or rotate occurs within the cycle time of the instruction and increases the power and flexibility of many data processing operations.

The results of an operation are fed back to the destination register. Load/store instructions may also use the output of the arithmetic units to generate the memory address for a load or store.

Processor Modes

It is quite common for a processor to support only a small number of processor modes. For example, many operating systems make use of just two modes: a user mode and a kernel mode, with the latter mode used to execute privileged system software. In contrast, the ARM architecture provides a flexible foundation for operating systems to enforce a variety of protection policies.

The ARM architecture supports seven execution modes. Most application programs execute in user mode. While the processor is in user mode, the program being executed is unable to access protected system resources or to change mode, other than by causing an exception to occur.

The remaining six execution modes are referred to as privileged modes. These modes are used to run system software. There are two principal advantages to defining so many different privileged modes: (1) The OS can tailor the use of system software to a variety of circumstances, and (2) certain registers are dedicated for use for each of the privileged modes, allowing swifter changes in context.

The exception modes have full access to system resources and can change modes freely. Five of these modes are known as exception modes. These are entered when specific exceptions occur. Each of these modes has some dedicated registers that substitute for some of the user mode registers, and which are used to avoid corrupting User mode state information when the exception occurs. The exception modes are as follows:

■ Supervisor mode: Usually what the OS runs in. It is entered when the processor encounters a software interrupt instruction. Software interrupts are a standard way to invoke operating system services on ARM.

■ Abort mode: Entered in response to memory faults.

■ Undefined mode: Entered when the processor attempts to execute an instruction that is supported neither by the main integer core nor by one of the coprocessors.

■ Fast interrupt mode: Entered whenever the processor receives an interrupt signal from the designated fast interrupt source. A fast interrupt cannot be interrupted, but a fast interrupt may interrupt a normal interrupt.

■ Interrupt mode: Entered whenever the processor receives an interrupt signal from any other interrupt source (other than fast interrupt). An interrupt may only be interrupted by a fast interrupt.

The remaining privileged mode is the System mode. This mode is not entered by any exception and uses the same registers available in User mode. The System mode is used for running certain privileged operating system tasks. System mode tasks may be interrupted by any of the five exception categories.

Register Organization

Figure below depicts the user- visible registers for the ARM.

The ARM processor has a total of 37 32-bit registers, classified as follows:

■ Thirty- one registers referred to in the ARM manual as general- purpose registers. In fact, some of these, such as the program counters, have special purposes.

■ Six program status registers.

Registers are arranged in partially overlapping banks, with the current processor mode determining which bank is available. At any time, sixteen numbered registers and one or two program status registers are visible, for a total of 17 or 18 software- visible registers.

Figure above is interpreted as follows:

■ Registers R0 through R7, register R15 (the program counter) and the current program status register (CPSR) are visible in and shared by all modes.

■ Registers R8 through R12 are shared by all modes except fast interrupt, which has its own dedicated registers R8_fiq through R12_fiq.

■ All the exception modes have their own versions of registers R13 and R14.

■ All the exception modes have a dedicated saved program status register (SPSR).

GENERAL PURPOSE REGISTERS

Register R13 is normally used as a stack pointer and is also known as the SP. Because each exception mode has a separate R13, each exception mode can have its own dedicated program stack. R14 is known as the link register (LR) and is used to hold subroutine return addresses and exception mode returns. Register R15 is the program counter (PC).

PROGRAM STATUS REGISTERS

The CPSR is accessible in all processor modes. Each exception mode also has a dedicated SPSR that is used to preserve the value of the CPSR when the associated exception occurs.

The 16 most significant bits of the CPSR contain user flags visible in User mode, and which can be used to affect the operation of a program (Figure above). These are as follows:

■ Condition code flags: The N, Z, C, and V flags, which are discussed in module 12.

■ Q flag: used to indicate whether overflow and/or saturation has occurred in some SIMD- oriented instructions.

■ J bit: indicates the use of special 8-bit instructions, known as Jazelle instructions, which are beyond the scope of our discussion.

■ GE[3:0] bits: SIMD instructions use bits [19:16] as Greater than or Equal (GE) flags for individual bytes or halfwords of the result.

The 16 least significant bits of the CPSR contain system control flags that can only be altered when the processor is in a privileged mode. The fields are as follows:

■ E bit: Controls load and store endianness for data; ignored for instruction fetches.

■ Interrupt disable bits: The A bit disables imprecise data aborts when set; the I bit disables IRQ interrupts when set; and the F bit disables FIQ interrupts when set.

■ T bit: Indicates whether instructions should be interpreted as normal ARM instructions or Thumb instructions.

■ Mode bits: Indicates the processor mode.

Interrupt Processing

As with any processor, the ARM includes a facility that enables the processor to interrupt the currently executing program to deal with exception conditions. Exceptions are generated by internal and external sources to cause the processor to handle an event. The processor state just before handling the exception is normally preserved so that the original program can be resumed when the exception routine has completed. More than one exception can arise at the same time. The ARM architecture supports seven types of exceptions.

Table above lists the types of exception and the processor mode that is used to process each type. When an exception occurs, execution is forced from a fixed memory address corresponding to the type of exception. These fixed addresses are called the exception vectors.  If more than one interrupt is outstanding, they are handled in priority order. The table lists the exceptions in priority order, highest to lowest. When an exception occurs, the processor halts execution after the current instruction.

The state of the processor is preserved in the SPSR that corresponds to the type of exception, so that the original program can be resumed when the exception routine has completed. The address of the instruction the processor was just about to execute is placed in the link register of the appropriate processor mode. To return after handling the exception, the SPSR is moved into the CPSR and R14 is moved into the PC.