As we discussed in moudule 4, a computer system employs a memory hierarchy. At higher levels of the hierarchy, memory is faster, smaller, and more expensive (per bit). Within the processor, there is a set of registers that function as a level of memory above main memory and cache in the hierarchy. The registers in the processor perform two roles:

■ User- visible registers: Enable the machine- or assembly language programmer to minimize main memory references by optimizing use of registers.

■ Control and status registers: Used by the control unit to control the operation of the processor and by privileged, operating system programs to control the execution of programs.

There is not a clean separation of registers into these two categories. For example, on some machines the program counter is user visible (e.g., x86), but on many it is not. For purposes of the following discussion, however, we will use these categories.

User- Visible Registers

A user- visible register is one that may be referenced by means of the machine language that the processor executes. We can characterize these in the following categories:

■ General purpose

■ Data

■ Address

■ Condition codes

General- purpose registers can be assigned to a variety of functions by the programmer. Sometimes their use within the instruction set is orthogonal to the operation. That is, any general- purpose register can contain the operand for any opcode. This provides true general- purpose register use. Often, however, there are restrictions. For example, there may be dedicated registers for floating- point and stack operations.

In some cases, general- purpose registers can be used for addressing functions (e.g., register indirect, displacement). In other cases, there is a partial or clean separation between data registers and address registers. Data registers may be used only to hold data and cannot be employed in the calculation of an operand address.

Address registers may themselves be somewhat general purpose, or they may be devoted to a particular addressing mode. Examples include the following:

■ Segment pointers: In a machine with segmented addressing , a segment register holds the address of the base of the segment. There may be multiple registers: for example, one for the operating system and one for the current process.

■ Index registers: These are used for indexed addressing and may be autoindexed.

■ Stack pointer: If there is user- visible stack addressing, then typically there is a dedicated register that points to the top of the stack. This allows implicit addressing; that is, push, pop, and other stack instructions need not contain an explicit stack operand.

here are several design issues to be addressed here. An important issue is whether to use completely general- purpose registers or to specialize their use. We have already touched on this issue in the preceding chapter because it affects instruction set design. With the use of specialized registers, it can generally be implicit in the opcode which type of register a certain operand specifier refers to. The operand specifier must only identify one of a set of specialized registers rather than one out of all the registers, thus saving bits. On the other hand, this specialization limits the programmer’s flexibility.

Another design issue is the number of registers, either general purpose or data plus address, to be provided. Again, this affects instruction set design because more registers require more operand specifier bits. As we previously discussed, somewhere between 8 and 32 registers appears optimum . Fewer registers result in more memory references; more registers do not noticeably reduce memory references. However, a new approach, which finds advantage in the use of hundreds of registers, is exhibited in some RISC systems and is discussed in module15.

Finally, there is the issue of register length. Registers that must hold addresses obviously must be at least long enough to hold the largest address. Data registers should be able to hold values of most data types. Some machines allow two contiguous registers to be used as one for holding double- length values.

A final category of registers, which is at least partially visible to the user, holds condition codes (also referred to as flags). Condition codes are bits set by the processor hardware as the result of operations. For example, an arithmetic operation may produce a positive, negative, zero, or overflow result. In addition to the result itself being stored in a register or memory, a condition code is also set. The code may subsequently be tested as part of a conditional branch operation.

Condition code bits are collected into one or more registers. Usually, they form part of a control register. Generally, machine instructions allow these bits to be read by implicit reference, but the programmer cannot alter them.

Many processors, including those based on the IA- 64 architecture and the MIPS processors, do not use condition codes at all. Rather, conditional branch instructions specify a comparison to be made and act on the result of the comparison, without storing a condition code. Table below lists key advantages and disadvantages of condition codes.

In some machines, a subroutine call will result in the automatic saving of all user- visible registers, to be restored on return. The processor performs the saving and restoring as part of the execution of call and return instructions. This allows each subroutine to use the user- visible registers independently. On other machines, it is the responsibility of the programmer to save the contents of the relevant user- visible registers prior to a subroutine call, by including instructions for this purpose in the program.

Control and Status Registers

There are a variety of processor registers that are employed to control the operation of the processor. Most of these, on most machines, are not visible to the user. Some of them may be visible to machine instructions executed in a control or operating system mode. Of course, different machines will have different register organizations and use different terminology. We list here a reasonably complete list of register types, with a brief description.

Four registers are essential to instruction execution:

■ Program counter (PC): Contains the address of an instruction to be fetched.

■ Instruction register (IR): Contains the instruction most recently fetched.

■ Memory address register (MAR): Contains the address of a location in memory.

■ Memory buffer register (MBR): Contains a word of data to be written to memory or the word most recently read.

Not all processors have internal registers designated as MAR and MBR, but some equivalent buffering mechanism is needed whereby the bits to be transferred to the system bus are staged and the bits to be read from the data bus are temporarily stored.

Typically, the processor updates the PC after each instruction fetch so that the PC always points to the next instruction to be executed. A branch or skip instruction will also modify the contents of the PC. The fetched instruction is loaded into an IR, where the opcode and operand specifiers are analyzed. Data are exchanged with memory using the MAR and MBR. In a bus- organized system, the MAR connects directly to the address bus, and the MBR connects directly to the data bus. User- visible registers, in turn, exchange data with the MBR.

The four registers just mentioned are used for the movement of data between the processor and memory. Within the processor, data must be presented to the ALU for processing. The ALU may have direct access to the MBR and user- visible registers. Alternatively, there may be additional buffering registers at the boundary to the ALU; these registers serve as input and output registers for the ALU and exchange data with the MBR and user- visible registers.

Many processor designs include a register or set of registers, often known as the program status word (PSW), that contain status information. The PSW typically contains condition codes plus other status information. Common fields or flags include the following:

■ Sign: Contains the sign bit of the result of the last arithmetic operation.

■ Zero: Set when the result is 0.

■ Carry: Set if an operation resulted in a carry (addition) into or borrow (subtraction) out of a high- order bit. Used for multiword arithmetic operations.

■ Equal: Set if a logical compare result is equality.

■ Overflow: Used to indicate arithmetic overflow.

■ Interrupt Enable/Disable: Used to enable or disable interrupts.

■ Supervisor: Indicates whether the processor is executing in supervisor or user mode. Certain privileged instructions can be executed only in supervisor mode, and certain areas of memory can be accessed only in supervisor mode.

A number of other registers related to status and control might be found in a particular processor design. There may be a pointer to a block of memory containing additional status information (e.g., process control blocks). In machines using vectored interrupts, an interrupt vector register may be provided. If a stack is used to implement certain functions (e.g., subroutine call), then a system stack pointer is needed. A page table pointer is used with a virtual memory system. Finally, registers may be used in the control of I/O operations.

A number of factors go into the design of the control and status register organization. One key issue is operating system support. Certain types of control information are of specific utility to the operating system. If the processor designer has a functional understanding of the operating system to be used, then the register organization can to some extent be tailored to the operating system.

Another key design decision is the allocation of control information between registers and memory. It is common to dedicate the first (lowest) few hundred or thousand words of memory for control purposes. The designer must decide how much control information should be in registers and how much in memory. The usual trade- off of cost versus speed arises.

Example Microprocessor Register Organizations

It is instructive to examine and compare the register organization of comparable systems. In this section, we look at two 16-bit microprocessors that were designed at about the same time: the Motorola MC68000 [STRI79] and the Intel 8086 [MORS78]. Figures A, above, and b depict the register organization of each; purely internal registers, such as a memory address register, are not shown.

The MC68000 partitions its 32-bit registers into eight data registers and nine address registers. The eight data registers are used primarily for data manipulation and are also used in addressing as index registers. The width of the registers allows 8-, 16-, and 32-bit data operations, determined by opcode. The address registers contain 32-bit (no segmentation) addresses; two of these registers are also used as stack pointers, one for users and one for the operating system, depending on the current execution mode. Both registers are numbered 7, because only one can be used at a time. The MC68000 also includes a 32-bit program counter and a 16-bit status register.

The Motorola team wanted a very regular instruction set, with no special- purpose registers. A concern for code efficiency led them to divide the registers into two functional components, saving one bit on each register specifier. This seems a reasonable compromise between complete generality and code compaction.

The Intel 8086 takes a different approach to register organization. Every register is special purpose, although some registers are also usable as general purpose. The 8086 contains four 16-bit data registers that are addressable on a byte or 16-bit basis, and four 16-bit pointer and index registers. The data registers can be used as general purpose in some instructions. In others, the registers are used implicitly. For example, a multiply instruction always uses the accumulator. The four pointer registers are also used implicitly in a number of operations; each contains a segment offset. There are also four 16-bit segment registers. Three of the four segment registers are used in a dedicated, implicit fashion, to point to the segment of the current instruction (useful for branch instructions), a segment containing data, and a segment containing a stack, respectively. These dedicated and implicit uses provide for compact encoding at the cost of reduced flexibility. The 8086 also includes an instruction pointer and a set of 1-bit status and control flags.

The point of this comparison should be clear. There is no universally accepted philosophy concerning the best way to organize processor registers.  As with overall instruction set design and so many other processor design issues, it is still a matter of judgment and taste.

A second instructive point concerning register organization design is illustrated in Figure C. This figure shows the user- visible register organization for the Intel 80386, which is a 32-bit microprocessor designed as an extension of the 8086.1 The 80386 uses 32-bit registers. However, to provide upward compatibility for programs written on the earlier machine, the 80386 retains the original register organization embedded in the new organization. Given this design constraint, the architects of the 32-bit processors had limited flexibility in designing the register organization.