As computer systems evolve, greater performance can be achieved by taking advantage of improvements in technology, such as faster circuitry. In addition, organizational enhancements to the processor can improve performance. We have already seen some examples of this, such as the use of multiple registers rather than a single accumulator, and the use of a cache memory. Another organizational approach, which is quite common, is instruction pipelining.

Pipelining Strategy

Instruction pipelining is similar to the use of an assembly line in a manufacturing plant. An assembly line takes advantage of the fact that a product goes through various stages of production. By laying the production process out in an assembly line, products at various stages can be worked on simultaneously. This process is also referred to as pipelining, because, as in a pipeline, new inputs are accepted at one end before previously accepted inputs appear as outputs at the other end.

To apply this concept to instruction execution, we must recognize that, in fact, an instruction has a number of stages. The figures above, for example, breaks the instruction cycle up into 10 tasks, which occur in sequence. Clearly, there should be some opportunity for pipelining.

As a simple approach, consider subdividing instruction processing into two stages: fetch instruction and execute instruction. There are times during the execution of an instruction when main memory is not being accessed. This time could be used to fetch the next instruction in parallel with the execution of the current one. Figure A below, depicts this approach.

The pipeline has two independent stages. The first stage fetches an instruction and buffers it. When the second stage is free, the first stage passes it the buffered instruction. While the second stage is executing the instruction, the first stage takes advantage of any unused memory cycles to fetch and buffer the next instruction. This is called instruction prefetch or fetch overlap. Note that this approach, which involves instruction buffering, requires more registers. In general, pipelining requires registers to store data between stages.

It should be clear that this process will speed up instruction execution. If the fetch and execute stages were of equal duration, the instruction cycle time would be halved. However, if we look more closely at this pipeline (Figure B), we will see that this doubling of execution rate is unlikely for two reasons:

1. The execution time will generally be longer than the fetch time. Execution will involve reading and storing operands and the performance of some operation. Thus, the fetch stage may have to wait for some time before it can empty its buffer.

2. A conditional branch instruction makes the address of the next instruction to be fetched unknown. Thus, the fetch stage must wait until it receives the next instruction address from the execute stage. The execute stage may then have to wait while the next instruction is fetched.

Guessing can reduce the time loss from the second reason. A simple rule is the following: When a conditional branch instruction is passed on from the fetch to the execute stage, the fetch stage fetches the next instruction in memory after the branch instruction. Then, if the branch is not taken, no time is lost. If the branch is taken, the fetched instruction must be discarded and a new instruction fetched.

While these factors reduce the potential effectiveness of the two- stage pipeline, some speedup occurs. To gain further speedup, the pipeline must have more stages. Let us consider the following decomposition of the instruction processing.

■ Fetch instruction (FI): Read the next expected instruction into a buffer.

■ Decode instruction (DI): Determine the opcode and the operand specifiers.

■ Calculate operands (CO): Calculate the effective address of each source operand. This may involve displacement, register indirect, indirect, or other forms of address calculation.

■ Fetch operands (FO): Fetch each operand from memory. Operands in registers need not be fetched.

■ Execute instruction (EI): Perform the indicated operation and store the result, if any, in the specified destination operand location.

■ Write operand (WO): Store the result in memory.

With this decomposition, the various stages will be of more nearly equal duration. For the sake of illustration, let us assume equal duration. Using this assumption, Figure below shows that a six- stage pipeline can reduce the execution time for 9 instructions from 54 time units to 14 time units.

Several comments are in order: The diagram assumes that each instruction goes through all six stages of the pipeline. This will not always be the case. For example, a load instruction does not need the WO stage. However, to simplify the pipeline hardware, the timing is set up assuming that each instruction requires all six stages. Also, the diagram assumes that all of the stages can be performed in parallel. In particular, it is assumed that there are no memory conflicts. For example, the FI, FO, and WO stages involve a memory access. The diagram implies that all these accesses can occur simultaneously. Most memory systems will not permit that. However, the desired value may be in cache, or the FO or WO stage may be null. Thus, much of the time, memory conflicts will not slow down the pipeline.

Several other factors serve to limit the performance enhancement. If the six stages are not of equal duration, there will be some waiting involved at various pipeline stages, as discussed before for the two- stage pipeline. Another difficulty is the conditional branch instruction, which can invalidate several instruction fetches. A similar unpredictable event is an interrupt.

Figure above illustrates the effects of the conditional branch, using the same program as the figure prior. Assume that instruction 3 is a conditional branch to instruction 15. Until the instruction is executed, there is no way of knowing which instruction will come next. The pipeline, in this example, simply loads the next instruction in sequence (instruction 4) and proceeds.

In the original plot, the branch is not taken, and we get the full performance benefit of the enhancement. This is not determined until the end of time unit 7. At this point, the pipeline must be cleared of instructions that are not useful. During time unit 8, instruction 15 enters the pipeline. No instructions complete during time units 9 through 12; this is the performance penalty incurred because we could not anticipate the branch. The next figure indicates the logic needed for pipelining to account for branches and interrupts.

Other problems arise that did not appear in our simple two- stage organization. The CO stage may depend on the contents of a register that could be altered by a previous instruction that is still in the pipeline. Other such register and memory conflicts could occur. The system must contain logic to account for this type of conflict.

Figure below shows same sequence of events, with time progressing vertically down the figure, and each row showing the state of the pipeline at a given point in time.

In Figure A, the pipeline is full at time 6, with 6 different instructions in various stages of execution, and remains full through time 9; we assume that instruction I9 is the last instruction to be executed. In Figure B, the pipeline is full at times 6 and 7. At time 7, instruction 3 is in the execute stage and executes a branch to instruction 15. At this point, instructions I4 through I7 are flushed from the pipeline, so that at time 8, only two instructions are in the pipeline, I3 and I15.

From the preceding discussion, it might appear that the greater the number of stages in the pipeline, the faster the execution rate. Some of the IBM S/360 designers pointed out two factors that frustrate this seemingly simple pattern for high- performance design , and they remain elements that designer must still consider:

1. At each stage of the pipeline, there is some overhead involved in moving data from buffer to buffer and in performing various preparation and delivery functions. This overhead can appreciably lengthen the total execution time of a single instruction. This is significant when sequential instructions are logically dependent, either through heavy use of branching or through memory access dependencies.

2. The amount of control logic required to handle memory and register dependencies and to optimize the use of the pipeline increases enormously with the number of stages. This can lead to a situation where the logic controlling the gating between stages is more complex than the stages being controlled.

Another consideration is latching delay: It takes time for pipeline buffers to operate and this adds to instruction cycle time. Instruction pipelining is a powerful technique for enhancing performance but requires careful design to achieve optimum results with reasonable complexity.

Pipeline Performance

In this subsection, we develop some simple measures of pipeline performance and relative speedup . The cycle time t of an instruction pipeline is the time needed to advance a set of instructions one stage through the pipeline; each column in the previous images represents one cycle time. The cycle time can be determined as:

In general, the time delay d is equivalent to a clock pulse and tm >>d. Now suppose that n instructions are processed, with no branches. Let Tk, n be the total time required for a pipeline with k stages to execute n instructions. Then:

total of k cycles are required to complete the execution of the first instruction, and the remaining n - 1 instructions require n - 1 cycles. The ninth instruction completes at time cycle 14:

Now consider a processor with equivalent functions but no pipeline, and assume that the instruction cycle time is kT. The speedup factor for the instruction pipeline compared to execution without the pipeline is defined as:

Figure below plots the speedup factor as a function of the number of instructions that are executed without a branch. As might be expected, at the limit (n S ∞), we have a k- fold speedup.

Figure B, below, on the other hand, shows the speedup factor as a function of the number of stages in the instruction pipeline.

In this case, the speedup factor approaches the number of instructions that can be fed into the pipeline without branches. Thus, the larger the number of pipeline stages, the greater the potential for speedup. However, as a practical matter, the potential gains of additional pipeline stages are countered by increases in cost, delays between stages, and the fact that branches will be encountered requiring the flushing of the pipeline.

Pipeline Hazards

In the previous subsection, we mentioned some of the situations that can result in less than optimal pipeline performance. In this subsection, we examine this issue in a more systematic way. Module 16 revisits this issue, in more detail, after we have introduced the complexities found in superscalar pipeline organizations.

A pipeline hazard occurs when the pipeline, or some portion of the pipeline, must stall because conditions do not permit continued execution. Such a pipeline stall is also referred to as a pipeline bubble. There are three types of hazards: resource, data, and control.

Resource Hazards

A resource hazard occurs when two (or more) instructions that are already in the pipeline need the same resource. The result is that the instructions must be executed in serial rather than parallel for a portion of the pipeline. A resource hazard is sometime referred to as a structural hazard.

Let us consider a simple example of a resource hazard. Assume a simplified five- stage pipeline, in which each stage takes one clock cycle. Figure below shows the ideal case, in which a new instruction enters the pipeline each clock cycle.

Now assume that main memory has a single port and that all instruction fetches and data reads and writes must be performed one at a time. Further, ignore the cache. In this case, an operand read to or write from memory cannot be performed in parallel with an instruction fetch. This is illustrated in Figure B, on t he other hand, which assumes that the source operand for instruction I1 is in memory, rather than a register. Therefore, the fetch instruction stage of the pipeline must idle for one cycle before beginning the instruction fetch for instruction I3. The figure assumes that all other operands are in registers.

Another example of a resource conflict is a situation in which multiple instructions are ready to enter the execute instruction phase and there is a single ALU. One solutions to such resource hazards is to increase available resources, such as having multiple ports into main memory and multiple ALU units. One approach to analyzing resource conflicts and aiding in the design of pipelines is the reservation table.

DATA HAZARDS

A data hazard occurs when there is a conflict in the access of an operand location. In general terms, we can state the hazard in this form: Two instructions in a program are to be executed in sequence and both access a particular memory or register operand. If the two instructions are executed in strict sequence, no problem occurs. However, if the instructions are executed in a pipeline, then it is possible for the operand value to be updated in such a way as to produce a different result than would occur with strict sequential execution. In other words, the program produces an incorrect result because of the use of pipelining.

As an example, consider the following x86 machine instruction sequence:

The first instruction adds the contents of the 32-bit registers EAX and EBX and stores the result in EAX. The second instruction subtracts the contents of EAX from ECX and stores the result in ECX. Figure below now shows the pipeline behavior.

The ADD instruction does not update register EAX until the end of stage 5, which occurs at clock cycle 5. But the SUB instruction needs that value at the beginning of its stage 2, which occurs at clock cycle 4. To maintain correct operation, the pipeline must stall for two clocks cycles. Thus, in the absence of special hardware and specific avoidance algorithms, such a data hazard results in inefficient pipeline usage. There are three types of data hazards:

■ Read after write (RAW), or true dependency: An instruction modifies a register or memory location and a succeeding instruction reads the data in that memory or register location. A hazard occurs if the read takes place before the write operation is complete.

■ Write after read (WAR), or antidependency: An instruction reads a register or memory location and a succeeding instruction writes to the location. A hazard occurs if the write operation completes before the read operation takes place.

■ Write after write (WAW), or output dependency: Two instructions both write to the same location. A hazard occurs if the write operations take place in the reverse order of the intended sequence.

CONTROL HAZARDS

A control hazard, also known as a branch hazard, occurs when the pipeline makes the wrong decision on a branch prediction and therefore brings instructions into the pipeline that must subsequently be discarded. We discuss approaches to dealing with control hazards next.

Dealing with Branches

One of the major problems in designing an instruction pipeline is assuring a steady flow of instructions to the initial stages of the pipeline. The primary impediment, as we have seen, is the conditional branch instruction. Until the instruction is actually executed, it is impossible to determine whether the branch will be taken or not. A variety of approaches have been taken for dealing with conditional branches:

■ Multiple streams

■ Prefetch branch target

■ Loop buffer

■ Branch prediction

■ Delayed branch

MULTIPLE STREAMS

A simple pipeline suffers a penalty for a branch instruction because it must choose one of two instructions to fetch next and may make the wrong choice. A brute- force approach is to replicate the initial portions of the pipeline and allow the pipeline to fetch both instructions, making use of two streams. There are two problems with this approach:

■ With multiple pipelines there are contention delays for access to the registers and to memory.

■ Additional branch instructions may enter the pipeline (either stream) before the original branch decision is resolved. Each such instruction needs an additional stream.

Despite these drawbacks, this strategy can improve performance. Examples of machines with two or more pipeline streams are the IBM 370/168 and the IBM 3033.

PREFETCH BRANCH TARGET

When a conditional branch is recognized, the target of the branch is prefetched, in addition to the instruction following the branch. This target is then saved until the branch instruction is executed. If the branch is taken, the target has already been prefetched. The IBM 360/91 uses this approach.

LOOP BUFFER

A loop buffer is a small, very- high- speed memory maintained by the instruction fetch stage of the pipeline and containing the n most recently fetched instructions, in sequence. If a branch is to be taken, the hardware first checks whether the branch target is within the buffer. If so, the next instruction is fetched from the buffer. The loop buffer has three benefits:

1. With the use of prefetching, the loop buffer will contain some instruction sequentially ahead of the current instruction fetch address. Thus, instructions fetched in sequence will be available without the usual memory access time.

2. If a branch occurs to a target just a few locations ahead of the address of the branch instruction, the target will already be in the buffer. This is useful for the rather common occurrence of IF– THEN and IF– THEN– ELSE sequences.

3. This strategy is particularly well suited to dealing with loops, or iterations; hence the name loop buffer. If the loop buffer is large enough to contain all the instructions in a loop, then those instructions need to be fetched from memory only once, for the first iteration. For subsequent iterations, all the needed instructions are already in the buffer.

The loop buffer is similar in principle to a cache dedicated to instructions. The differences are that the loop buffer only retains instructions in sequence and is much smaller in size and hence lower in cost. Figure below gives an example of a loop buffer.

If the buffer contains 256 bytes, and byte addressing is used, then the least significant 8 bits are used to index the buffer. The remaining most significant bits are checked to determine if the branch target lies within the environment captured by the buffer. Among the machines using a loop buffer are some of the CDC machines ( Star- 100, 6600, 7600) and the CRAY- 1. A specialized form of loop buffer is available on the Motorola 68010, for executing a three- instruction loop involving the DBcc (decrement and branch on condition) instruction (see Problem 14.14). A three- word buffer is maintained, and the processor executes these instructions repeatedly until the loop condition is satisfied.

BRANCH PREDICTION

Various techniques can be used to predict whether a branch will be taken. Among the more common are the following:

■ Predict never taken

■ Predict always taken

■ Predict by opcode

■ Taken/not taken switch

■ Branch history table

The first three approaches are static: they do not depend on the execution history up to the time of the conditional branch instruction. The latter two approaches are dynamic: They depend on the execution history. The first two approaches are the simplest. These either always assume that the branch will not be taken and continue to fetch instructions in sequence, or they always assume that the branch will be taken and always fetch from the branch target. The predict- never- taken approach is the most popular of all the branch prediction methods.

Studies analyzing program behavior have shown that conditional branches are taken more than 50% of the time, and so if the cost of prefetching from either path is the same, then always prefetching from the branch target address should give better performance than always prefetching from the sequential path. However, in a paged machine, prefetching the branch target is more likely to cause a page fault than prefetching the next instruction in sequence, and so this performance penalty should be taken into account. An avoidance mechanism may be employed to reduce this penalty.

The final static approach makes the decision based on the opcode of the branch instruction. The processor assumes that the branch will be taken for certain branch opcodes and not for others.  Dynamic branch strategies attempt to improve the accuracy of prediction by recording the history of conditional branch instructions in a program. For example, one or more bits can be associated with each conditional branch instruction that reflect the recent history of the instruction.

These bits are referred to as a taken/ not taken switch that directs the processor to make a particular decision the next time the instruction is encountered. Typically, these history bits are not associated with the instruction in main memory. Rather, they are kept in temporary high- speed storage. One possibility is to associate these bits with any conditional branch instruction that is in a cache. When the instruction is replaced in the cache, its history is lost. Another possibility is to maintain a small table for recently executed branch instructions with one or more history bits in each entry. The processor could access the table associatively, like a cache, or by using the low- order bits of the branch instruction’s address.

With a single bit, all that can be recorded is whether the last execution of this instruction resulted in a branch or not. A shortcoming of using a single bit appears in the case of a conditional branch instruction that is almost always taken, such as a loop instruction. With only one bit of history, an error in prediction will occur twice for each use of the loop: once on entering the loop, and once on exiting.

If two bits are used, they can be used to record the result of the last two instances of the execution of the associated instruction, or to record a state in some other fashion. Figure below shows a typical approach.

Assume that the algorithm starts at the upper- left- hand corner of the flowchart. As long as each succeeding conditional branch instruction that is encountered is taken, the decision process predicts that the next branch will be taken. If a single prediction is wrong, the algorithm continues to predict that the next branch is taken. Only if two successive branches are not taken does the algorithm shift to the right- hand side of the flowchart. Subsequently, the algorithm will predict that branches are not taken until two branches in a row are taken. Thus, the algorithm requires two consecutive wrong predictions to change the prediction decision.

The decision process can be represented more compactly by a finite- state machine, shown in Figure below. The finite- state machine representation is commonly used in the literature.

The use of history bits, as just described, has one drawback: If the decision is made to take the branch, the target instruction cannot be fetched until the target address, which is an operand in the conditional branch instruction, is decoded. Greater efficiency could be achieved if the instruction fetch could be initiated as soon as the branch decision is made. For this purpose, more information must be saved, in what is known as a branch target buffer, or a branch history table.

The branch history table is a small cache memory associated with the instruction fetch stage of the pipeline. Each entry in the table consists of three elements: the address of a branch instruction, some number of history bits that record the state of use of that instruction, and information about the target instruction. In most proposals and implementations, this third field contains the address of the target instruction. Another possibility is for the third field to actually contain the target instruction. The trade- off is clear: Storing the target address yields a smaller table but a greater instruction fetch time compared with storing the target instruction.

Figure above contrasts this scheme with a predict- never- taken strategy. With the former strategy, the instruction fetch stage always fetches the next sequential address. If a branch is taken, some logic in the processor detects this and instructs that the next instruction be fetched from the target address (in addition to flushing the pipeline). The branch history table is treated as a cache. Each prefetch triggers a lookup in the branch history table. If no match is found, the next sequential address is used for the fetch. If a match is found, a prediction is made based on the state of the instruction: Either the next sequential address or the branch target address is fed to the select logic.

When the branch instruction is executed, the execute stage signals the branch history table logic with the result. The state of the instruction is updated to reflect a correct or incorrect prediction. If the prediction is incorrect, the select logic is redirected to the correct address for the next fetch. When a conditional branch instruction is encountered that is not in the table, it is added to the table and one of the existing entries is discarded, using one of the cache replacement algorithms discussed in module 4.

A refinement of the branch history approach is referred to as two- level or correlation- based branch history. This approach is based on the assumption that whereas in loop- closing branches, the past history of a particular branch instruction is a good predictor of future behavior, with more complex control- flow structures, the direction of a branch is frequently correlated with the direction of related branches. An example is an if- then- else or case structure. There are a number of strategies possible. Typically, recent global branch history (i.e., the history of the most recent branches not just of this branch instruction) is used in addition to the history of the current branch instruction. The general structure is defined as an (m, n) correlator, which uses the behavior of the last m branches to choose from 2m n- bit branch predictors for the current branch instruction. In other words, an n- bit history is kept for a give branch for each possible combination of branches taken by the most recent m branches.

DELAYED BRANCH

It is possible to improve pipeline performance by automatically rearranging instructions within a program, so that branch instructions occur later than actually desired. This intriguing approach is examined in module15.

Intel 80486 Pipelining

An instructive example of an instruction pipeline is that of the Intel 80486. The 80486 implements a five- stage pipeline:

■ Fetch: Instructions are fetched from the cache or from external memory and placed into one of the two 16-byte prefetch buffers. The objective of the fetch stage is to fill the prefetch buffers with new data as soon as the old data have been consumed by the instruction decoder. Because instructions are of variable length (from 1 to 11 bytes not counting prefixes), the status of the prefetcher relative to the other pipeline stages varies from instruction to instruction. On average, about five instructions are fetched with each 16-byte load [CRAW90]. The fetch stage operates independently of the other stages to keep the prefetch buffers full.

■ Decode stage 1: All opcode and addressing- mode information is decoded in the D1 stage. The required information, as well as instruction- length information, is included in at most the first 3 bytes of the instruction. Hence, 3 bytes are passed to the D1 stage from the prefetch buffers. The D1 decoder can then direct the D2 stage to capture the rest of the instruction (displacement and immediate data), which is not involved in the D1 decoding.

■ Decode stage 2: The D2 stage expands each opcode into control signals for the ALU. It also controls the computation of the more complex addressing modes.

■ Execute: This stage includes ALU operations, cache access, and register update.

■ Write back: This stage, if needed, updates registers and status flags modified during the preceding execute stage. If the current instruction updates memory, the computed value is sent to the cache and to the bus- interface write buffers at the same time.

With the use of two decode stages, the pipeline can sustain a throughput of close to one instruction per clock cycle. Complex instructions and conditional branches can slow down this rate. Figures below shows examples of the operation of the pipeline.

Figure A shows that there is no delay introduced into the pipeline when a memory access is required. However, as Figure B shows, there can be a delay for values used to compute memory addresses. That is, if a value is loaded from memory into a register and that register is then used as a base register in the next instruction, the processor will stall for one cycle. In this example, the processor accesses the cache in the EX stage of the first instruction and stores the value retrieved in the register during the WB stage. However, the next instruction needs this register in its D2 stage. When the D2 stage lines up with the WB stage of the previous instruction, bypass signal paths allow the D2 stage to have access to the same data being used by the WB stage for writing, saving one pipeline stage.

Figure C illustrates the timing of a branch instruction, assuming that the branch is taken. The compare instruction updates condition codes in the WB stage, and bypass paths make this available to the EX stage of the jump instruction at the same time. In parallel, the processor runs a speculative fetch cycle to the target of the jump during the EX stage of the jump instruction. If the processor determines a false branch condition, it discards this prefetch and continues execution with the next sequential instruction (already fetched and decoded).