In this section, we look at some of the general characteristics of and the motivation for a reduced instruction set architecture. Specific examples will be seen later in this chapter. We begin with a discussion of motivations for contemporary complex instruction set architectures.

Why CISC

We have noted the trend to richer instruction sets, which include a larger number of instructions and more complex instructions. Two principal reasons have motivated this trend: a desire to simplify compilers and a desire to improve performance. Underlying both of these reasons was the shift to HLLs on the part of programmers; architects attempted to design machines that provided better support for HLLs.

It is not the intent of this chapter to say that the CISC designers took the wrong direction. Indeed, because technology continues to evolve and because architectures exist along a spectrum rather than in two neat categories, a black- and- white assessment is unlikely ever to emerge. Thus, the comments that follow are simply meant to point out some of the potential pitfalls in the CISC approach and to provide some understanding of the motivation of the RISC adherents.

The first of the reasons cited, compiler simplification, seems obvious, but it is not. The task of the compiler writer is to build a compiler that generates good (fast, small, fast and small) sequences of machine instructions for HLL programs (i.e., the compiler views individual HLL statements in the context of surrounding HLL statements). If there are machine instructions that resemble HLL statements, this task is simplified. This reasoning has been disputed by the RISC researchers. They have found that complex machine instructions are often hard to exploit because the compiler must find those cases that exactly fit the construct. The task of optimizing the generated code to minimize code size, reduce instruction execution count, and enhance pipelining is much more difficult with a complex instruction set. As evidence of this, studies cited earlier in this chapter indicate that most of the instructions in a compiled program are the relatively simple ones.

The other major reason cited is the expectation that a CISC will yield smaller, faster programs. Let us examine both aspects of this assertion: that programs will be smaller and that they will execute faster. There are two advantages to smaller programs. Because the program takes up less memory, there is a savings in that resource. With memory today being so inexpensive, this potential advantage is no longer compelling. More important, smaller programs should improve performance, and this will happen in three ways. First, fewer instructions means fewer instruction bytes to be fetched. Second, in a paging environment, smaller programs occupy fewer pages, reducing page faults. Third, more instructions fit in cache(s).

The problem with this line of reasoning is that it is far from certain that a CISC program will be smaller than a corresponding RISC program. In many cases, the CISC program, expressed in symbolic machine language, may be shorter (i.e., fewer instructions), but the number of bits of memory occupied may not be noticeably smaller. Table below shows results from three studies that compared the size of compiled C programs on a variety of machines, including RISC I, which has a reduced instruction set architecture. Note that there is little or no savings using a CISC over a RISC. It is also interesting to note that the VAX, which has a much more complex instruction set than the PDP- 11, achieves very little savings over the latter. These results were confirmed by IBM researchers [RADI83], who found that the IBM 801 (a RISC) produced code that was 0.9 times the size of code on an IBM S/370. The study used a set of PL/I programs.

There are several reasons for these rather surprising results. We have already noted that compilers on CISCs tend to favor simpler instructions, so that the conciseness of the complex instructions seldom comes into play. Also, because there are more instructions on a CISC, longer opcodes are required, producing longer instructions. Finally, RISCs tend to emphasize register rather than memory references, and the former require fewer bits. An example of this last effect is discussed presently.

So the expectation that a CISC will produce smaller programs, with the attendant advantages, may not be realized. The second motivating factor for increasingly complex instruction sets was that instruction execution would be faster. It seems to make sense that a complex HLL operation will execute more quickly as a single machine instruction rather than as a series of more primitive instructions. However, because of the bias toward the use of those simpler instructions, this may not be so.

The entire control unit must be made more complex, and/or the microprogram control store must be made larger, to accommodate a richer instruction set. Either factor increases the execution time of the simple instructions.

In fact, some researchers have found that the speedup in the execution of complex functions is due not so much to the power of the complex machine instructions as to their residence in high- speed control store [RADI83]. In effect, the control store acts as an instruction cache. Thus, the hardware architect is in the position of trying to determine which subroutines or functions will be used most frequently and assigning those to the control store by implementing them in microcode. The results have been less than encouraging. On S/390 systems, instructions such as Translate and Extended- Precision- Floating- Point- Divide reside in high- speed storage, while the sequence involved in setting up procedure calls or initiating an interrupt handler are in slower main memory.

Thus, it is far from clear that a trend to increasingly complex instruction sets is appropriate. This has led a number of groups to pursue the opposite path.

Characteristics of Reduced Instruction Set Architectures

Although a variety of different approaches to reduced instruction set architecture have been taken, certain characteristics are common to all of them:

■ One instruction per cycle

■ Register- to- register operations

■ Simple addressing modes

■ Simple instruction formats

Here, we provide a brief discussion of these characteristics. Specific examples are explored later in this chapter.

The first characteristic listed is that there is one machine instruction per machine cycle. A machine cycle is defined to be the time it takes to fetch two operands from registers, perform an ALU operation, and store the result in a register. Thus, RISC machine instructions should be no more complicated than, and execute about as fast as, microinstructions on CISC machines (discussed in Part Four). With simple, one- cycle instructions, there is little or no need for microcode; the machine instructions can be hardwired. Such instructions should execute faster than comparable machine instructions on other machines, because it is not necessary to access a microprogram control store during instruction execution.

A second characteristic is that most operations should be register to register, with only simple LOAD and STORE operations accessing memory. This design feature simplifies the instruction set and therefore the control unit. For example, a RISC instruction set may include only one or two ADD instructions (e.g., integer add, add with carry); the VAX has 25 different ADD instructions. Another benefit is that such an architecture encourages the optimization of register use, so that frequently accessed operands remain in high- speed storage.

This emphasis on register- to- register operations is notable for RISC designs. Contemporary CISC machines provide such instructions but also include memory- to- memory and mixed register/memory operations. Attempts to compare these approaches were made in the 1970s, before the appearance of RISCs. Figure A below illustrates the approach taken.

Hypothetical architectures were evaluated on program size and the number of bits of memory traffic. Results such as this one led one researcher to suggest that future architectures should contain no registers at all . One wonders what he would have thought, at the time, of the RISC machine once produced by Pyramid, which contained no less than 528 registers!

What was missing from those studies was a recognition of the frequent access to a small number of local scalars and that, with a large bank of registers or an optimizing compiler, most operands could be kept in registers for long periods of time. Thus, Figure B above may be a fairer comparison.

A third characteristic is the use of simple addressing modes. Almost all RISC instructions use simple register addressing. Several additional modes, such as displacement and PC- relative, may be included. Other, more complex modes can be synthesized in software from the simple ones. Again, this design feature simplifies the instruction set and the control unit.

A final common characteristic is the use of simple instruction formats. Generally, only one or a few formats are used. Instruction length is fixed and aligned on word boundaries. Field locations, especially the opcode, are fixed. This design feature has a number of benefits. With fixed fields, opcode decoding and register operand accessing can occur simultaneously. Simplified formats simplify the control unit. Instruction fetching is optimized because word- length units are fetched. Alignment on a word boundary also means that a single instruction does not cross page boundaries.

Taken together, these characteristics can be assessed to determine the potential performance benefits of the RISC approach. A certain amount of “circumstantial evidence” can be presented. First, more effective optimizing compilers can be developed. With more- primitive instructions, there are more opportunities for moving functions out of loops, reorganizing code for efficiency, maximizing register utilization, and so forth. It is even possible to compute parts of complex instructions at compile time. For example, the S/390 Move Characters (MVC) instruction moves a string of characters from one location to another. Each time it is executed, the move will depend on the length of the string, whether and in which direction the locations overlap, and what the alignment characteristics are. In most cases, these will all be known at compile time. Thus, the compiler could produce an optimized sequence of primitive instructions for this function.

A second point, already noted, is that most instructions generated by a compiler are relatively simple anyway. It would seem reasonable that a control unit built specifically for those instructions and using little or no microcode could execute them faster than a comparable CISC.

A third point relates to the use of instruction pipelining. RISC researchers feel that the instruction pipelining technique can be applied much more effectively with a reduced instruction set. We examine this point in some detail presently.

A final, and somewhat less significant, point is that RISC processors are more responsive to interrupts because interrupts are checked between rather elementary operations. Architectures with complex instructions either restrict interrupts to instruction boundaries or must define specific interruptible points and implement mechanisms for restarting an instruction.

The case for improved performance for a reduced instruction set architecture is strong, but one could perhaps still make an argument for CISC. A number of studies have been done, but not on machines of comparable technology and power. Further, most studies have not attempted to separate the effects of a reduced instruction set and the effects of a large register file. The “circumstantial evidence,” however, is suggestive.

CISC versus RISC Characteristics

After the initial enthusiasm for RISC machines, there has been a growing realization that (1) RISC designs may benefit from the inclusion of some CISC features and that (2) CISC designs may benefit from the inclusion of some RISC features. The result is that the more recent RISC designs, notably the PowerPC, are no longer “pure” RISC and the more recent CISC designs, notably the Pentium II and later Pentium models, do incorporate some RISC characteristics.

Table above lists a number of processors and compares them across a number of characteristics. For purposes of this comparison, the following are considered typical of a classic RISC:

1. A single instruction size.

2. That size is typically 4 bytes.

3. A small number of data addressing modes, typically less than five. This parameter is difficult to pin down. In the table, register and literal modes are not counted and different formats with different offset sizes are counted separately.

4. No indirect addressing that requires you to make one memory access to get the address of another operand in memory.

5. No operations that combine load/store with arithmetic (e.g., add from memory, add to memory).

6. No more than one memory- addressed operand per instruction.

7. Does not support arbitrary alignment of data for load/store operations.

8. Maximum number of uses of the memory management unit (MMU) for a data address in an instruction.

9. Number of bits for integer register specifier equal to five or more. This means that at least 32 integer registers can be explicitly referenced at a time.

10. Number of bits for floating- point register specifier equal to four or more. This means that at least 16 floating- point registers can be explicitly referenced at a time.

Items 1 through 3 are an indication of instruction decode complexity. Items 4 through 8 suggest the ease or difficulty of pipelining, especially in the presence of virtual memory requirements. Items 9 and 10 are related to the ability to take good advantage of compilers. In the table, the first eight processors are clearly RISC architectures, the next five are clearly CISC, and the last two are processors often thought of as RISC that in fact have many CISC characteristics.