For many years, the general trend in computer architecture and organization has been toward increasing processor complexity: more instructions, more addressing modes, more specialized registers, and so on. The RISC movement represents a fundamental break with the philosophy behind that trend. Naturally, the appearance of RISC systems, and the publication of papers by its proponents extolling RISC virtues, led to a reaction from those involved in the design of CISC architectures. The work that has been done on assessing merits of the RISC approach can be grouped into two categories:

■ Quantitative: Attempts to compare program size and execution speed of programs on RISC and CISC machines that use comparable technology.

■ Qualitative: Examines issues such as high- level language support and optimum use of VLSI real estate.

Most of the work on quantitative assessment has been done by those working on RISC systems, and it has been, by and large, favorable to the RISC approach. Others have examined the issue and come away unconvinced. There are several problems with attempting such comparisons:

■ There is no pair of RISC and CISC machines that are comparable in life- cycle cost, level of technology, gate complexity, sophistication of compiler, operating system support, and so on.

■ No definitive test set of programs exists. Performance varies with the program.

■ It is difficult to sort out hardware effects from effects due to skill in compiler writing.

■ Most of the comparative analysis on RISC has been done on “toy” machines rather than commercial products. Furthermore, most commercially available machines advertised as RISC possess a mixture of RISC and CISC characteristics. Thus, a fair comparison with a commercial, “ pure- play” CISC machine (e.g., VAX, Pentium) is difficult.

The qualitative assessment is, almost by definition, subjective. Several researchers have turned their attention to such an assessment , but the results are, at best, ambiguous, and certainly subject to rebuttal and, of course, counterrebuttal.