Pipelining with Regular Instructions

As we discussed in module 12, instruction pipelining is often used to enhance performance. Let us reconsider this in the context of a RISC architecture. Most instructions are register to register, and an instruction cycle has the following two stages:

■ I: Instruction fetch.

■ E: Execute. Performs an ALU operation with register input and output.

For load and store operations, three stages are required:

■ I: Instruction fetch.

■ E: Execute. Calculates memory address.

■ D: Memory. Register- to- memory or memory- to- register operation.

Figure A below  depicts the timing of a sequence of instructions using no pipelining.

Clearly, this is a wasteful process. Even very simple pipelining can substantially improve performance. Figure Bshows a two- stage pipelining scheme, in which the I and E stages of two different instructions are performed simultaneously. The two stages of the pipeline are an instruction fetch stage, and an execute/ memory stage that executes the instruction, including register- to- memory and memory- to- register operations. Thus we see that the instruction fetch stage of the second instruction can be performed in parallel with the first part of the execute/ memory stage. However, the execute/memory stage of the second instruction must be delayed until the first instruction clears the second stage of the pipeline. This scheme can yield up to twice the execution rate of a serial scheme. Two problems prevent the maximum speedup from being achieved. First, we assume that a single- port memory is used and that only one memory access is possible per stage. This requires the insertion of a wait state in some instructions. Second, a branch instruction interrupts the sequential flow of execution. To accommodate this with minimum circuitry, a NOOP instruction can be inserted into the instruction stream by the compiler or assembler.

Pipelining can be improved further by permitting two memory accesses per stage. This yields the sequence shown in Figure C. Now, up to three instructions can be overlapped, and the improvement is as much as a factor of 3. Again, branch instructions cause the speedup to fall short of the maximum possible. Also, note that data dependencies have an effect. If an instruction needs an operand that is altered by the preceding instruction, a delay is required. Again, this can be accomplished by a NOOP.

The pipelining discussed so far works best if the three stages are of approximately equal duration. Because the E stage usually involves an ALU operation, it may be longer. In this case, we can divide into two substages:

■ E1: Register file read

■ E2: ALU operation and register write

Because of the simplicity and regularity of a RISC instruction set, the design of the phasing into three or four stages is easily accomplished. Figure D shows the result with a four- stage pipeline. Up to four instructions at a time can be under way, and the maximum potential speedup is a factor of 4. Note again the use of NOOPs to account for data and branch delays.

Optimization of Pipelining

Because of the simple and regular nature of RISC instructions, it is easier for a hardware designer to implement a simple, fast pipeline. There are few variations in instruction execution duration, and the pipeline can be tailored to reflect this. However, we have seen that data and branch dependencies reduce the overall execution rate.

DELAYED BRANCH To compensate for these dependencies, code reorganization techniques have been developed. First, let us consider branching instructions. Delayed branch, a way of increasing the efficiency of the pipeline, makes use of a branch that does not take effect until after execution of the following instruction (hence the term delayed). The instruction location immediately following the branch is referred to as the delay slot. This strange procedure is illustrated in the table below.

In the column labeled “normal branch,” we see a normal symbolic instruction machine- language program. After 102 is executed, the next instruction to be executed is 105. To regularize the pipeline, a NOOP is inserted after this branch. However, increased performance is achieved if the instructions at 101 and 102 are interchanged.

Figures below shows the result.

Figure A above shows the traditional approach to pipelining, of the type discussed in module 14. The JUMP instruction is fetched at time 4. At time 5, the JUMP instruction is executed at the same time that instruction 103 (ADD instruction) is fetched. Because a JUMP occurs, which updates the program counter, the pipeline must be cleared of instruction 103; at time 6, instruction 105, which is the target of the JUMP, is loaded. Figure B shows the same pipeline handled by a typical RISC organization. The timing is the same. However, because of the insertion of the NOOP instruction, we do not need special circuitry to clear the pipeline; the NOOP simply executes with no effect. Figure Cshows the use of the delayed branch. The JUMP instruction is fetched at time 2, before the ADD instruction, which is fetched at time 3. Note, however, that the ADD instruction is fetched before the execution of the JUMP instruction has a chance to alter the program counter. Therefore, during time 4, the ADD instruction is executed at the same time that instruction 105 is fetched. Thus, the original semantics of the program are retained but two fewer clock cycles are required for execution.

This interchange of instructions will work successfully for unconditional branches, calls, and returns. For conditional branches, this procedure cannot be blindly applied. If the condition that is tested for the branch can be altered by the immediately preceding instruction, then the compiler must refrain from doing the interchange and instead insert a NOOP. Otherwise, the compiler can seek to insert a useful instruction after the branch. The experience with both the Berkeley RISC and IBM 801 systems is that the majority of conditional branch instructions can be optimized in this fashion.

DELAYED LOAD

A similar sort of tactic, called the delayed load, can be used on LOAD instructions. On LOAD instructions, the register that is to be the target of the load is locked by the processor. The processor then continues execution of the instruction stream until it reaches an instruction requiring that register, at which point it idles until the load is complete. If the compiler can rearrange instructions so that useful work can be done while the load is in the pipeline, efficiency is increased.

LOOP UNROLLING

Another compiler technique to improve instruction parallelism is loop unrolling. Unrolling replicates the body of a loop some number of times called the unrolling factor (u) and iterates by step u instead of step 1. Unrolling can improve the performance by:

■ reducing loop overhead

■ increasing instruction parallelism by improving pipeline performance

■ improving register, data cache, or TLB locality

Loop overhead is cut in half because two iterations are performed before the test and branch at the end of the loop. Instruction parallelism is increased because the second assignment can be performed while the results of the first are being stored and the loop variables are being updated. If array elements are assigned to registers, register locality will improve because a[i] and a[i + 1] are used twice in the loop body, reducing the number of loads per iteration from three to two.

As a final note, we should point out that the design of the instruction pipeline should not be carried out in isolation from other optimization techniques applied to the system.