Since the development of the stored- program computer around 1950, there have been remarkably few true innovations in the areas of computer organization and architecture. The following are some of the major advances since the birth of the computer:

■ The family concept: Introduced by IBM with its System/360 in 1964, followed shortly thereafter by DEC, with its PDP- 8. The family concept decouples the architecture of a machine from its implementation. A set of computers is offered, with different price/performance characteristics, that presents the same architecture to the user. The differences in price and performance are due to different implementations of the same architecture.

■ Microprogrammed control unit: Suggested by Wilkes in 1951 and introduced by IBM on the S/360 line in 1964. Microprogramming eases the task of designing and implementing the control unit and provides support for the family concept.

■ Cache memory: First introduced commercially on IBM S/360 Model 85 in 1968. The insertion of this element into the memory hierarchy dramatically improves performance.

■ Pipelining: A means of introducing parallelism into the essentially sequential nature of a machine- instruction program. Examples are instruction pipelining and vector processing.

■ Multiple processors: This category covers a number of different organizations and objectives.

■ Reduced instruction set computer (RISC) architecture: This is the focus of this chapter.

When it appeared, RISC architecture was a dramatic departure from the historical trend in processor architecture. An analysis of the RISC architecture brings into focus many of the important issues in computer organization and architecture.

Although RISC architectures have been defined and designed in a variety of ways by different groups, the key elements shared by most designs are these:

■ A large number of general- purpose registers, and/or the use of compiler technology to optimize register usage.

■ A limited and simple instruction set.

■ An emphasis on optimizing the instruction pipeline.

Table below compares several RISC and non- RISC systems.

One of the most visible forms of evolution associated with computers is that of programming languages. As the cost of hardware has dropped, the relative cost of software has risen. Along with that, a chronic shortage of programmers has driven up software costs in absolute terms. Thus, the major cost in the life cycle of a system is software, not hardware. Adding to the cost, and to the inconvenience, is the element of unreliability: it is common for programs, both system and application, to continue to exhibit new bugs after years of operation.

The response from researchers and industry has been to develop ever more powerful and complex high- level programming languages. These high- level languages (HLLs): (1) allow the programmer to express algorithms more concisely; (2) allow the compiler to take care of details that are not important in the programmer’s expression of algorithms; and (3) often support naturally the use of structured programming and/or object- oriented design.

Alas, this solution gave rise to a perceived problem, known as the semantic gap, the difference between the operations provided in HLLs and those provided in computer architecture. Symptoms of this gap are alleged to include execution inefficiency, excessive machine program size, and compiler complexity. Designers responded with architectures intended to close this gap. Key features include large instruction sets, dozens of addressing modes, and various HLL statements implemented in hardware. An example of the latter is the CASE machine instruction on the VAX. Such complex instruction sets are intended to:

■ Ease the task of the compiler writer.

■ Improve execution efficiency, because complex sequences of operations can be implemented in microcode.

■ Provide support for even more complex and sophisticated HLLs.

Meanwhile, a number of studies have been done over the years to determine the characteristics and patterns of execution of machine instructions generated from HLL programs. The results of these studies inspired some researchers to look for a different approach: namely, to make the architecture that supports the HLL simpler, rather than more complex. To understand the line of reasoning of the RISC advocates, we begin with a brief review of instruction execution characteristics. The aspects of computation of interest are as follows:

■ Operations performed: These determine the functions to be performed by the processor and its interaction with memory.

■ Operands used: The types of operands and the frequency of their use determine the memory organization for storing them and the addressing modes for accessing them.

■ Execution sequencing: This determines the control and pipeline organization.

In the remainder of this section, we summarize the results of a number of studies of high- level- language programs. All of the results are based on dynamic measurements. That is, measurements are collected by executing the program and counting the number of times some feature has appeared or a particular property has held true. In contrast, static measurements merely perform these counts on the source text of a program. They give no useful information on performance, because they are not weighted relative to the number of times each statement is executed.

Operations

A variety of studies have been made to analyze the behavior of HLL programs. There is quite good agreement in the results of this mixture of languages and applications. Assignment statements predominate, suggesting that the simple movement of data is of high importance. There is also a preponderance of conditional statements (IF, LOOP). These statements are implemented in machine language with some sort of compare and branch instruction.

This suggests that the sequence control mechanism of the instruction set is important. These results are instructive to the machine instruction set designer, indicating which types of statements occur most often and therefore should be supported in an “optimal” fashion. However, these results do not reveal which statements use the most time in the execution of a typical program. That is, we want to answer the question: Given a compiled machine- language program, which statements in the source language cause the execution of the most machine- language instructions and what is the execution time of these instructions?

To get at this underlying phenomenon, the Patterson programs [PATT82a], described in Appendix 4A, were compiled on the VAX, PDP- 11, and Motorola 68000 to determine the average number of machine instructions and memory references per statement type. The second and third columns in the next table show the relative frequency of occurrence of various HLL statements in a variety of programs; the data were obtained by observing the occurrences in running programs rather than just the number of times that statements occur in the source code. Hence these metrics capture dynamic behavior.

To obtain the data in columns four and five ( machine- instruction weighted), each value in the second and third columns is multiplied by the number of machine instructions produced by the compiler. These results are then normalized so that columns four and five show the relative frequency of occurrence, weighted by the number of machine instructions per HLL statement. Similarly, the sixth and seventh columns are obtained by multiplying the frequency of occurrence of each statement type by the relative number of memory references caused by each statement. The data in columns four through seven provide surrogate measures of the actual time spent executing the various statement types. The results suggest that the procedure call/return is the most time- consuming operation in typical HLL programs.

The reader should be clear on the significance of  the table above. This table indicates the relative performance impact of various statement types in an HLL, when that HLL is compiled for a typical contemporary instruction set architecture. Some other architecture could conceivably produce different results. However, this study produces results that are representative for contemporary complex instruction set computer (CISC) architectures. Thus, they can provide guidance to those looking for more efficient ways to support HLLs.

Operands

Much less work has been done on the occurrence of types of operands, despite the importance of this topic. There are several aspects that are significant. The Patterson study already referenced also looked at the dynamic frequency of occurrence of classes of variables (Table below).

The results, consistent between Pascal and C programs, show that most references are to simple scalar variables. Further, more than 80% of the scalars were local (to the procedure) variables. In addition, each reference to an array or a structure requires a reference to an index or pointer, which again is usually a local scalar. Thus, there is a preponderance of references to scalars, and these are highly localized.

The Patterson study examined the dynamic behavior of HLL programs, independent of the underlying architecture. As discussed before, it is necessary to deal with actual architectures to examine program behavior more deeply. One study, examined DEC- 10 instructions dynamically and found that each instruction on the average references 0.5 operand in memory and 1.4 registers. Similar results are reported in a study for C, Pascal, and FORTRAN programs on S/370, PDP- 11, and VAX. Of course, these figures depend highly on both the architecture and the compiler, but they do illustrate the frequency of operand accessing.

These latter studies suggest the importance of an architecture that lends itself to fast operand accessing, because this operation is performed so frequently. The Patterson study suggests that a prime candidate for optimization is the mechanism for storing and accessing local scalar variables.

Procedure Calls

We have seen that procedure calls and returns are an important aspect of HLL programs. The evidence on the second table suggests that these are the most time- consuming operations in compiled HLL programs. Thus, it will be profitable to consider ways of implementing these operations efficiently. Two aspects are significant: the number of parameters and variables that a procedure deals with, and the depth of nesting.

Tanenbaum’s study found that 98% of dynamically called procedures were passed fewer than six arguments and that 92% of them used fewer than six local scalar variables. Similar results were reported by the Berkeley RISC team , as shown in the next table. These results show that the number of words required per procedure activation is not large. The studies reported earlier indicated that a high proportion of operand references is to local scalar variables. These studies show that those references are in fact confined to relatively few variables.

The same Berkeley group also looked at the pattern of procedure calls and returns in HLL programs. They found that it is rare to have a long uninterrupted sequence of procedure calls followed by the corresponding sequence of returns. Rather, they found that a program remains confined to a rather narrow window of procedure- invocation depth. This is illustrated in module 4. These results reinforce the conclusion that operand references are highly localized.

Implications

A number of groups have looked at results such as those just reported and have concluded that the attempt to make the instruction set architecture close to HLLs is not the most effective design strategy. Rather, the HLLs can best be supported by optimizing performance of the most time- consuming features of typical HLL programs.

Generalizing from the work of a number of researchers, three elements emerge that, by and large, characterize RISC architectures. First, use a large number of registers or use a compiler to optimize register usage. This is intended to optimize operand referencing. The studies just discussed show that there are several references per HLL statement and that there is a high proportion of move (assignment) statements. This, coupled with the locality and predominance of scalar references, suggests that performance can be improved by reducing memory references at the expense of more register references. Because of the locality of these references, an expanded register set seems practical.

Second, careful attention needs to be paid to the design of instruction pipelines. Because of the high proportion of conditional branch and procedure call instructions, a straightforward instruction pipeline will be inefficient. This manifests itself as a high proportion of instructions that are prefetched but never executed.

Finally, an instruction set consisting of high- performance primitives is indicated. Instructions should have predictable costs (measured in execution time, code size, and increasingly, in energy dissipation) and be consistent with a high- performance implementation (which harmonizes with predictable execution- time cost).