The results summarized in the first section point out the desirability of quick access to operands. We have seen that there is a large proportion of assignment statements in HLL programs, and many of these are of the simple form AdB. Also, there is a significant number of operand accesses per HLL statement. If we couple these results with the fact that most accesses are to local scalars, heavy reliance on register storage is suggested.

The reason that register storage is indicated is that it is the fastest available storage device, faster than both main memory and cache. The register file is physically small, on the same chip as the ALU and control unit, and employs much shorter addresses than addresses for cache and memory. Thus, a strategy is needed that will allow the most frequently accessed operands to be kept in registers and to minimize register- memory operations.

Two basic approaches are possible, one based on software and the other on hardware. The software approach is to rely on the compiler to maximize register usage. The compiler will attempt to assign registers to those variables that will be used the most in a given time period. This approach requires the use of sophisticated program- analysis algorithms. The hardware approach is simply to use more registers so that more variables can be held in registers for longer periods of time.

In this section, we will discuss the hardware approach. This approach has been pioneered by the Berkeley RISC group ; was used in the first commercial RISC product, the Pyramid ; and is currently used in the popular SPARC architecture.

Register Windows

On the face of it, the use of a large set of registers should decrease the need to access memory. The design task is to organize the registers in such a fashion that this goal is realized.

Because most operand references are to local scalars, the obvious approach is to store these in registers, with perhaps a few registers reserved for global variables. The problem is that the definition of local changes with each procedure call and return, operations that occur frequently. On every call, local variables must be saved from the registers into memory, so that the registers can be reused by the called procedure. Furthermore, parameters must be passed. On return, the variables of the calling procedure must be restored (loaded back into registers) and results must be passed back to the calling procedure.

The solution is based on two other results reported in the  first section. First, a typical procedure employs only a few passed parameters and local variables. Second, the depth of procedure activation fluctuates within a relatively narrow range. To exploit these properties, multiple small sets of registers are used, each assigned to a different procedure. A procedure call automatically switches the processor to use a different fixed- size window of registers, rather than saving registers in memory. Windows for adjacent procedures are overlapped to allow parameter passing.

The concept is illustrated in the above figure. At any time, only one window of registers is visible and is addressable as if it were the only set of registers (e.g., addresses 0 through N - 1). The window is divided into three fixed- size areas. Parameter registers hold parameters passed down from the procedure that called the current procedure and hold results to be passed back up. Local registers are used for local variables, as assigned by the compiler. Temporary registers are used to exchange parameters and results with the next lower level (procedure called by current procedure). The temporary registers at one level are physically the same as the parameter registers at the next lower level. This overlap permits parameters to be passed without the actual movement of data. Keep in mind that, except for the overlap, the registers at two different levels are physically distinct. That is, the parameter and local registers at level J are disjoint from the local and temporary registers at level J + 1.

To handle any possible pattern of calls and returns, the number of register windows would have to be unbounded. Instead, the register windows can be used to hold the few most recent procedure activations. Older activations must be saved in memory and later restored when the nesting depth decreases. Thus, the actual organization of the register file is as a circular buffer of overlapping windows. Two notable examples of this approach are Sun’s SPARC architecture, and the IA- 64 architecture used in Intel’s Itanium processor.

The circular organization is shown in the figure above, which depicts a circular buffer of six windows. The buffer is filled to a depth of 4 (A called B; B called C; C called D) with procedure D active. The current- window pointer (CWP) points to the window of the currently active procedure. Register references by a machine instruction are offset by this pointer to determine the actual physical register. The saved- window pointer (SWP) identifies the window most recently saved in memory. If procedure D now calls procedure E, arguments for E are placed in D’s temporary registers (the overlap between w3 and w4) and the CWP is advanced by one window.

If procedure E then makes a call to procedure F, the call cannot be made with the current status of the buffer. This is because F’s window overlaps A’s window. If F begins to load its temporary registers, preparatory to a call, it will overwrite the parameter registers of A (A.in). Thus, when CWP is incremented (modulo 6) so that it becomes equal to SWP, an interrupt occurs, and A’s window is saved. Only the first two portions (A.in and A.loc) need be saved. Then, the SWP is incremented and the call to F proceeds. A similar interrupt can occur on returns. For example, subsequent to the activation of F, when B returns to A, CWP is decremented and becomes equal to SWP. This causes an interrupt that results in the restoration of A’s window.

From the preceding, it can be seen that an N- window register file can hold only N - 1 procedure activations. The value of N need not be large. As was mentioned in Appendix 4A, one study found that, with 8 windows, a save or restore is needed on only 1% of the calls or returns. The Berkeley RISC computers use 8 windows of 16 registers each. The Pyramid computer employs 16 windows of 32 registers each.

Global Variables

The window scheme just described provides an efficient organization for storing local scalar variables in registers. However, this scheme does not address the need to store global variables, those accessed by more than one procedure. Two options suggest themselves. First, variables declared as global in an HLL can be assigned memory locations by the compiler, and all machine instructions that reference these variables will use memory- reference operands. This is straightforward, from both the hardware and software (compiler) points of view. However, for frequently accessed global variables, this scheme is inefficient.

An alternative is to incorporate a set of global registers in the processor. These registers would be fixed in number and available to all procedures. A unified numbering scheme can be used to simplify the instruction format. For example, references to registers 0 through 7 could refer to unique global registers, and references to registers 8 through 31 could be offset to refer to physical registers in the current window. There is an increased hardware burden to accommodate the split in register addressing. In addition, the linker must decide which global variables should be assigned to registers.

Large Register File versus Cache

The register file, organized into windows, acts as a small, fast buffer for holding a subset of all variables that are likely to be used the most heavily. From this point of view, the register file acts much like a cache memory, although a much faster memory. The question therefore arises as to whether it would be simpler and better to use a cache and a small traditional register file.

Table above compares characteristics of the two approaches. The window- based register file holds all the local scalar variables (except in the rare case of window overflow) of the most recent N - 1 procedure activations. The cache holds a selection of recently used scalar variables. The register file should save time, because all local scalar variables are retained. On the other hand, the cache may make more efficient use of space, because it is reacting to the situation dynamically. Furthermore, caches generally treat all memory references alike, including instructions and other types of data. Thus, savings in these other areas are possible with a cache and not a register file.

A register file may make inefficient use of space, because not all procedures will need the full window space allotted to them. On the other hand, the cache suffers from another sort of inefficiency: Data are read into the cache in blocks. Whereas the register file contains only those variables in use, the cache reads in a block of data, some or much of which will not be used.

The cache is capable of handling global as well as local variables. There are usually many global scalars, but only a few of them are heavily used. A cache will dynamically discover these variables and hold them. If the window- based register file is supplemented with global registers, it too can hold some global scalars. However, when program modules are separately compiled, it is impossible for the compiler to assign global values to registers; the linker must perform this task.

With the register file, the movement of data between registers and memory is determined by the procedure nesting depth. Because this depth usually fluctuates within a narrow range, the use of memory is relatively infrequent. Most cache memories are set associative with a small set size. Thus, there is the danger that other data or instructions will compete for cache residency.

Based on the discussion so far, the choice between a large window- based register file and a cache is not clear- cut. There is one characteristic, however, in which the register approach is clearly superior and which suggests that a cache- based system will be noticeably slower. This distinction shows up in the amount of addressing overhead experienced by the two approaches.

Figure above illustrates the difference. To reference a local scalar in a window- based register file, a “virtual” register number and a window number are used. These can pass through a relatively simple decoder to select one of the physical registers. To reference a memory location in cache, a full- width memory address must be generated. The complexity of this operation depends on the addressing mode. In a set associative cache, a portion of the address is used to read a number of words and tags equal to the set size. Another portion of the address is compared with the tags, and one of the words that were read is selected. It should be clear that even if the cache is as fast as the register file, the access time will be considerably longer. Thus, from the point of view of performance, the window- based register file is superior for local scalars. Further performance improvement could be achieved by the addition of a cache for instructions only.