Let us assume now that only a small number (e.g., 16–32) of registers is available on the target RISC machine. In this case, optimized register usage is the responsibility of the compiler. A program written in a high- level language has, of course, no explicit references to registers (the C- language keyword register notwithstanding). Rather, program quantities are referred to symbolically. The objective of the compiler is to keep the operands for as many computations as possible in registers rather than main memory, and to minimize load- and- store operations.

In general, the approach taken is as follows. Each program quantity that is a candidate for residing in a register is assigned to a symbolic or virtual register. The compiler then maps the unlimited number of symbolic registers into a fixed number of real registers. Symbolic registers whose usage does not overlap can share the same real register. If, in a particular portion of the program, there are more quantities to deal with than real registers, then some of the quantities are assigned to memory locations. Load- and- store instructions are used to position quantities in registers temporarily for computational operations.

The essence of the optimization task is to decide which quantities are to be assigned to registers at any given point in the program. The technique most commonly used in RISC compilers is known as graph coloring, which is a technique borrowed from the discipline of topology. The graph coloring problem is this. Given a graph consisting of nodes and edges, assign colors to nodes such that adjacent nodes have different colors, and do this in such a way as to minimize the number of different colors. This problem is adapted to the compiler problem in the following way. First, the program is analyzed to build a register interference graph. The nodes of the graph are the symbolic registers. If two symbolic registers are “live” during the same program fragment, then they are joined by an edge to depict interference. An attempt is then made to color the graph with n colors, where n is the number of registers. Nodes that share the same color can be assigned to the same register. If this process does not fully succeed, then those nodes that cannot be colored must be placed in memory, and loads and stores must be used to make space for the affected quantities when they are needed.

The figures below are example s of the process. Assume a program with six symbolic registers to be compiled into three actual registers. Figure A shows the time sequence of active use of each symbolic register. The dashed horizontal lines indicate successive instruction executions. Figure B shows the register interference graph (shading and stripes are used instead of colors). A possible coloring with three colors is indicated. Because symbolic registers A and D do not interfere, the compile can assign both of these to physical register R1. Similarly, symbolic registers C and E can be assigned to register R3. One symbolic register, F, is left uncolored and must be dealt with using loads and stores.

In general, there is a trade- off between the use of a large set of registers and compiler- based register optimization. For example, a study that modeled a RISC architecture with features similar to the Motorola 88000 and the MIPS R2000. The researchers varied the number of registers from 16 to 128, and they considered both the use of all general- purpose registers and registers split between integer and floating- point use. Their study showed that with even simple register optimization, there is little benefit to the use of more than 64 registers. With reasonably sophisticated register optimization techniques, there is only marginal performance improvement with more than 32 registers. Finally, they noted that with a small number of registers (e.g., 16), a machine with a shared register organization executes faster than one with a split organization. Similar conclusions can be drawn from a similar group, which reports on a study that is primarily concerned with optimizing the use of a small number of registers rather than comparing the use of large register sets with optimization efforts.