pandas is a Python package that lets you store your data in DataFrames -- tabular structures where each row is a record or observation, and each column can be a different type.

It is a convenienr way to store mixed data, where observation has multiple values associated with it with different data types: floats, integers, booleans, and strings.

Case Study: US Pet Ownership DataFrame

The data shown here, each row is one state from a dataset of pet ownership across the United States. Each record has a unique index, the name of the state, the state's rank in overall pet ownership, the total number of households, and the fraction of households that own dogs and cats. This kind of data is perfect for storing in Dataframes. Each row is a single record or observation -- the data belongs together. Each column shares the same datatype -- in this case, strings and floats.

.head() method

Loading the dataset above into a dataframe called "pets", we can start exploring the dataframe by calling the method ".head()" to get the first five rows of the dataframe and print them to the console. This is a convenient way to explore the dataframes and start to understand what data they contain before analyzing. When printing the data frame, pandas prints the name of each column of the dataframe, as well as the unique index for each row. (See example output below.)

.columns() attribute

We can get the column names alone with the ".columns" attribute of the dataframe. This returns the column names.

.index() attribute

We can get the labels for each row with the ".index" attribute. The indices of pandas rows are different from the 0-indexing of Python lists and NumPy arrays. They are not guaranteed to start at zero, to increase monotonically, or even to be integers. Pandas indices are only required to be unique.

Getting one column out

Individual columns can be accessed using the square brackets and passing the column name into the square brackets, just like dictionaries. This returns a pandas "Series" object, which is like a one-dimensional DataFrame. Note that the indices here match the indices of the DataFrame. In this case, the indices are the names of the states.