Selecting the right chart type to most effectively convey a message to your audience is of utmost importance in data visualization. There are numerous types of charts available, each designed for a purpose. Understanding the different types of charts available and why some charts are more appropriate for a certain purpose will make you a better data analyst and a better communicator with data. In this chapter, we describe some of the most commonly used types of charts and when they should be used. This will serve as a starting point for you to recognize some more advanced charts, as well as charts to be avoided.

Selecting an Appropriate Chart

How do you choose an appropriate chart? If the goal of your chart is to explain, then the answer to this question depends on the message you wish to convey to your audience. If you are exploring data, the best chart type depends on the question you are asking and hope to answer from the data. Also, the type of data you have may influence your chart selection. A few of the more common goals for charts are to show the following:

Composition is what makes up the whole of an entity under consideration. (Example: a bar graph or pie chart that shows the number of students per Year Level in TIP's Department of Computer Engineering.)

Ranking is the relative order of items. (Example: Same with composition but the chart is arranged according to their ranking.)

Correlation/Relationship is how two variables are related to one another. (Example: Relationship between exercise level and calories burned.)

Distribution is how items are dispersed. (Example: number of calls received by a call center in a day, measured on an hourly basis.)

Few Tips

The type of data you have should also influence your chart selection. For example, a bar or column chart is often an appropriate chart when we are summarizing data about categories. Students’ letter grades in a college course are categories. For summarizing the number of students earning each letter grade, a bar or column chart would be appropriate.

The relationship between two quantitative variables often makes a scatter chart an appropriate choice. Bar charts, scatter charts, and line charts with the horizontal axis being time, are often the best choice for time series data. If your data have a spatial component, a geographic map might be a good choice.

Creating great data visualizations is a skill that is best learned by doing. Therefore, before getting into more detail on the various types of charts and in what circumstances they are most appropriate, the next section will give you an overview in using our first visualization tool-- Google Spreadsheet.