Logic includes a set of principles that, when applied to arguments, allow us to demonstrate what is true.

Example of a logical argument demonstrates:

1. Socrates is a man.

2. All men are mortal.

3. Therefore, Socrates is mortal.

Applying logic is a way of developing and testing a hypothesis. Using this way of thinking, applying logic assumes you already know at least some things for sure and allows you to use that knowledge to arrive at some further conclusions.

In a logical argument, each individual thing you already know (or assume) is called a premise. A premise is like any ordinary statement you or I might make, except that it can be evaluated to obtain an answer of ‘true’ or ‘false’. A premise, therefore, has a truth value .

Once all the premises are stated, the next step is to analyze them and react accordingly with a conclusion.

Inductive vs deductive arguments

You can categorize arguments based on their certainty. The two best-known categories are deductive and inductive.

A deductive argument is the strongest form of reasoning because its conclusion necessarily follows from its premises (so long as it has been constructed properly and the premises are incontrovertibly true).

Example: The assessment of Socrates’s mortality.

A deductive argument can fail in one of two ways:

First, one of its premises could turn out to be false. For example:

1. Missie is a dog.

2. All dogs are brown.

3. Therefore, Missie is brown.

Premise 2 is false: not all dogs are brown. Even though the argument follows the exact same form as the Socrates example, it fails because at least one of its premises is false. Any argument with false premises fails. In computer jargon, this is an example of ‘garbage in, garbage out’.

The second way a deductive argument fails is when the conclusion doesn’t necessarily follow from the premises. For example:

1. All tennis balls are round.

2. The Earth is round.

3. Therefore, the Earth is a tennis ball.

This argument fails because of faulty logic. Yes, all tennis balls are round, but so are lots of other things. In symbolic terms, this argument follows the form, ‘All As are B; C is B; Therefore C is an A’, but since this is in an invalid form, the argument is automatically invalid too.

Inductive reasoning deals in probabilities rather than hard, black and white rules

The premises in an inductive argument are not unquestionably true. Rather, we have some level of confidence in them. The form of the argument doesn’t guarantee that the conclusion is true, but it probably results in a trustworthy conclusion. For example:

1. A bag contains 99 red balls and one black ball.

2. 100 people each drew one ball from the bag.

3. Sarah is one of those 100 people.

4. Therefore, Sarah probably drew a red ball.

This is a perfectly fine inductive argument, so long as you acknowledge the aspect of probability involved.

These aspects of reasoning are important in CT because computers are involved. The answer a computer gives is only as reliable as its reasoning, and since a computer is automating your reasoning, it’s your responsibility to make sure:

1. that reasoning is valid;

2. you give the computer reliable input;

3. you know how to interpret what conclusion the computer reports, that is, is the result unquestionably true (the reasoning was deductive) or probably true (the reasoning was inductive)?

Boolean logic

Even though much of our reasoning is inductive, computers are not well equipped to deal with shades of grey. Their binary nature makes them more apt to deal with black and white issues. In order to instruct computers to make logical decisions, we need a system of logic that maps well onto this way of thinking. Boolean logic is such a method. It’s a form of logic that deals with statements having one of only two values: true or false (usually). Different corresponding values could be used in other contexts: 1 or 0 for example, on or off, black or white.

Propositions

Statements in Boolean logic are also known as propositions, which have several basic properties.

First, a proposition can only have one value at any one time. In other words, a single proposition can’t be both true and false simultaneously. There is no way to express levels of certainty. True means true; false means false. Consequently, you should keep in mind what was said earlier about deductive and inductive arguments: whereas real-life problems often present us with probabilities, the basic Boolean world deals in certainties. Some of your efforts will go into mapping real-world, grey areas onto Boolean black and white.

Second, propositions must have clear and unambiguous meaning. For example, a statement like: ‘It is travelling fast’, can certainly be evaluated as either true or false. However, it’s ambiguous as stated. If ‘it’ is a car travelling at 150 mph along the motorway, that’s certainly fast. But if ‘it’ is a spacecraft travelling towards Mars at 150 mph, that’s undoubtedly slow.

Third, it’s possible to combine individual propositions to make more complex ones (called compound propositions). For example, ‘Jenny is wearing the shirt and the shirt is red.’ This is helpful because we often want to evaluate several statements before reaching a conclusion. We make compound propositions by connecting single propositions together using logical operators.

Logical operators

Imagine you say, ‘If the weather is sunny and I’m on holiday, then I’m going to lie in the garden.’ You’ve just used logical operators. That statement contains two propositions, which serve as conditions for whether, or not, you decide to lounge on the grass:

1. The weather is sunny.

2. You’re on holiday.

If both are true, then you can lie in the garden. If either of them are false (say, the weather is lousy or you have to go to work), then sunning yourself is not an option. That’s because you joined them using the logical operator AND, which demands that both propositions should be true for the conclusion to be true.

OR: the technical name for this operator is disjunction. This operator chains propositions together in a way that at least one of them must be true for the conclusion to be true also. The only way that the conclusion is falsified is if all propositions are false. For example:

If player 1 achieves a row or player 2 achieves a row, then the game is over.

In this case, only one condition needs to be true to end the game. In fact, due to the nature of the game, a maximum of one of these conditions can be true simultaneously. OR can also be used in cases when both conditions can be true at the same time:

If a player achieves a row or all squares become occupied, then the game is over.

NOT: the technical name for this operator is negation. This operator doesn’t chain propositions together itself, rather it modifies a single proposition. Specifically, it flips the truth value. Sometimes, negating a proposition can make it easier to express the chain of reasoning. For example:

If a square is not occupied, then a player may add their symbol to that square.

IMPLIES: the technical name for this operator is implication. Using this operator is to state that there is a correlation between the two statements. If the first statement is true, then the second must be true also. Keep in mind, this is a correlation not a causation. Therefore, you can’t necessarily work backwards from the conclusion of an implication. Consider this:

If a player achieves a row, then the game is over.

It’s true that a game ends when a player achieves a row, but it’s not the only way to end a game. Saying ‘the game is over, therefore a player achieved a row’ is not always true. The game could be over because it ended in a draw.

IF AND ONLY IF: the technical name for this operator is biconditional. This behaves very similarly to implication, but a biconditional means that the second proposition is influenced solely by the first. If the first is true, the second is true. If the first is false, the second is false. No exceptions. For example:

If and only if all squares are occupied, then no more moves are possible.

In this case, we can work backwards. The only reason no more moves are possible is because all squares are occupied.