Logic and algorithms are not the same. Rather, algorithms build on logic because, as part of their work, they make logical decisions. The other part of their work is ‘stitching’ those decisions together

Logic gives you a set of rules that allow you to reason about some aspect of the world. That world does not have to be static. Logic can deal with things that are dynamic and continually changing

But if we want to go further, if we want to build functioning systems based on rules, then logic alone isn’t sufficient. We need something that can integrate all these rules and execute actions based on the outcomes of evaluating them. That something is algorithms, and they are the power behind all real-world computational systems.

Algorithm: a sequence of clearly defined steps that describe a process to follow a finite set of unambiguous instructions with clear start and end points.

Algorithms are a way of specifying a multi-step task, and are especially useful when we wish to explain to a third party (be it human or machine) how to carry out steps with extreme precision. As with logic, humans already have an intuitive understanding of algorithms. But, at the same time, a rich and precise science dictates exactly how algorithms work. Gaining a deeper understanding of this will improve your algorithmic thinking. This is important because a correct algorithm is the ultimate basis of any computer-based solution.

Defining algorithms

The definition of an algorithm is complex and involves several properties. This subsection describes those properties.

Collection of individual steps

The first property to mention just restates something said earlier: an algorithm is a collection of individual steps. A recipe fits this analogy quite simply, filled as it is with steps like: ‘pre-heat the oven to 180 degrees Celsius’ or ‘add two tablespoons of sugar to the bowl’.

Definiteness

Following on from that property is definiteness, meaning that every step must be precisely defined. Each step in an algorithm can have one and only one meaning, otherwise it is ambiguous. Similarly, chefs have come to the same conclusion, which is why they produce recipes using precise measurements instead of writing things like ‘some sugar’ or ‘cook it for a while’.

Sequential

Algorithms are also sequential. The steps that make up the process must be carried out in the order specified. Failing to do this means that the result of executing the algorithm is likely incorrect. Think back to the analogy. Dicing an onion and frying an onion are different steps. Dicing an onion before you fry it has a different outcome than the reverse. Similarly, multiplying a number by 2 then adding 5 to it yields a different result from adding 5 first then doubling it. Like a recipe, you must respect the sequence when running through an algorithm for it to have any meaningful result.

Detour: State in algorithms

It’s worth going on a brief detour here to examine why sequence is so important to algorithms. It’s all to do with state, by which I simply mean the current values of all the things the algorithm is keeping track of. As a computer progresses through an algorithm, just as you progress through a recipe, the state of things can change. Clearly sequencing the steps of an algorithm ensures the that state always changes in the same way whenever the algorithm is executed.

State: the current configuration of all information kept track of by a program at any one instant in time.

There is no ‘global view’ when it comes to algorithms. This means that, at each instant in time, the environment in which the algorithm is being run exists in some particular state. But by the time the next step is executed, something might have changed. The environment really exists as a series of snapshots, one for each step of the algorithm. The recipe analogy spells this out. At the start you might have butter, flour, milk, eggs and sugar. After each step, you take a photograph of the kitchen. The photos will show that, bit by bit, the state of the ingredients changes. Flour goes into a bowl; then the eggs join it; then the butter goes into the pan; and so on. There is no global view of the ingredients; just a series of snapshots.

For algorithms, this means that individual steps are executed one by one and only a single step can be under consideration at any one time. Once a step has been executed, the computer forgets all about it and moves on to the next.

This means that some way of ‘remembering’ things that happened in previous steps needs to be provided. If you, the algorithm’s author, want the computer to remember the result of a step for later use, you have to explicitly tell the computer to do so. Algorithms provide for this by means of variables.

A variable in an algorithm is more like a scratchpad that’s used as a placeholder for important information the computer should keep note of. It can also have its values updated throughout an algorithm’s execution (this is called assignment). For example, if your algorithm counts the number of times a specific word appears in a news article, it would use a variable to keep track of the number as it reads through the text.

Controlling algorithm execution

In this section we’ll look at two ways of controlling the execution of an algorithm.

Iteration

As well as recording information pertinent to a problem, variables can also be used to control the execution of an algorithm. At a basic level, they can be used in two ways. One of those is iteration, also known as looping. Iteration allows you to repeat a series of steps over and over, without the need to write out each individual step manually.

Selection

In a loop, one way to control how many times the steps are repeated is simply to specify it; something like ‘repeat the following steps 99 times’. But notice that the example above doesn’t do that. Instead, it uses selection (aka a conditional), which is a way to test a variable’s current value and make a decision based on it. In the ‘99 Bottles’ song, the conditional comes at the end (repeat the verse if X is greater than 0). It’s telling the computer to do something so long as the condition specified is currently true. So long as a positive number of bottles remain, that condition is true and so the verse is repeated. But we know that the number is steadily decreasing and will eventually reach zero. At this point the condition becomes false (zero is not greater than zero), and so the verse is not repeated again.

Conditions can be used at any stage in an algorithm, not only to control loops. Wherever they are, they all serve the same purpose: creating a point at which the computer has to decide between performing a set of steps or not, and encapsulating the information needed to make that decision.

Example algorithm

This example illustrates some of the ideas just discussed. It is a partial and very simple algorithm for controlling a game of Noughts and Crosses. It’s written using pseudocode, which is an informal means of writing an algorithm. It’s aimed at a human audience rather than a computer, but it nevertheless closely follows the conventions of programming languages. This means you can easily translate your ideas into real program code by first writing them as pseudocode.

Let’s examine this algorithm:

• When this algorithm is executed, the computer goes through each line one at a time. (This is an example of sequence.)

• Line 1 initialises a variable, game, with a particular value, started (state).

• Line 2 sets up the starting point of a loop (iteration). All lines that are ‘inside’ this loop are indented to make it clearer what’s inside and outside.

• Line 3 asks for input from the player. The choice is recorded.

• Line 4 makes a selection based on the player’s choice. (Incidentally, this is a rather user-unfriendly algorithm. If a player accidentally chooses an occupied square, they get no opportunity to fix their mistake!)

• Lines 6 and 7 both make selections, altering the value of the game variable under certain conditions.

Line 9 is the end of the loop. A choice is made whether or not to go through the loop again depending on the associated condition at this point. There are two possibilities:

1. The game variable hasn’t been altered yet, meaning it still has the value started. In this case, execution moves back to line 3.

2. At some point, the game was won or drawn. In either case, the loop ends and execution continues onto line 10, whereupon the game finishes with a traditional ‘Game over’ message