DEFINING THE PROBLEM

Problem-solving involves transforming an undesirable state of affairs (the start point) into a desirable state of affairs (the goal). The start point and the goal are intimately linked. By examining the start point, you nail down exactly what is undesirable and why. In doing so, you reveal more about what your goal should be.

You might find things undesirable for any number of reasons.

• Maybe your current process is too slow, in which case your goal will involve making measurable improvements to the process’s speed.

• Maybe you regularly need to make certain decisions, but you have too much data to handle. This implies your goal may be to somehow automate your decision-making strategy or filter information before you analyze it.

• Maybe you have missing information about how something behaves. This suggests producing a model or simulation of it.

Decomposition

Computational thinking promotes one of these heuristics to a core practice:decomposition, which is an approach that seeks to break a complex problem down into simpler parts that are easier to deal with. Its particular importance to CT comes from the experiences of computer science. Programmers and computer scientists usually deal with large, complex problems that feature multiple interrelated parts. While someother heuristics prove useful some of the time, decomposition almost invariably helps in managing a complex problem where a computerised solution is the goal.

Decomposition is a divide-and-conquer strategy, something seen in numerous places outside computing:

Generals employ it on the battlefield when outnumbered by the enemy. By engaging only part of the enemy forces, they neutralise their opponent’s advantage of numbers and defeat them one group at a time.

Politicians use it to break opposition up into weaker parties who might otherwise unite into a stronger whole.

When faced with a large, diverse audience, marketers segment their potential customers into different stereotypes and target each one differently.Within the realm of CT, you use divide and conquer when the problem facing you is too large or complex to deal with all at once. For example, a problem may contain several interrelated parts, or a particular process might be made up of numerous steps that need spelling out. Applying decomposition to a problem requires you to pick all these apart.