Applying logic is a way of developing and testing a hypothesis. Using this way of thinking, applying logic assumes you already know at least some things for sure and allows you to use that knowledge to arrive at some further conclusions.

In a logical argument, each individual thing you already know (or assume) is called a premise. A premise is like any ordinary statement you or I might make, except that it can be evaluated to obtain an answer of ‘true’ or ‘false’. A premise, therefore, has a truth value .

A deductive argument is the strongest form of reasoning because its conclusion necessarily follows from its premises (so long as it has been constructed properly and the premises are incontrovertibly true).

The premises in an inductive argument are not unquestionably true. Rather, we have some level of confidence in them. The form of the argument doesn’t guarantee that the conclusion is true, but it probably results in a trustworthy conclusion.

Algorithm: a sequence of clearly defined steps that describe a process to follow a finite set of unambiguous instructions with clear start and end points.

Problem-solving involves transforming an undesirable state of affairs (the start point) into a desirable state of affairs (the goal). The start point and the goal are intimately linked. By examining the start point, you nail down exactly what is undesirable and why.

Computational thinking promotes one of these heuristics to a core practice:decomposition, which is an approach that seeks to break a complex problem down into simpler parts that are easier to deal with

Abstraction: a way of expressing an idea in a specific context while at the same time suppressing details irrelevant in that context.

‘Model’. That word that cropped up quite a lot during the discussion of abstraction. As representations of real-world things that ignore certain details, models are a type of abstraction and an important one in CS. Furthermore, CT has recognised the value of modelling by placing it as one of its fundamental practices