Data Preparation
Collected data may not be compatible or formatted correctly

Data must be prepared before it can be added to a data set

Extract, Transform and Load (ETL) is the process for collecting data from a variety of sources, transforming the data, and then loading the data into a database

Data preprocessing is a process of cleaning the raw data i.e. the data is collected in the real world and is converted to a clean data set. In other words, whenever the data is gathered from different sources it is collected in a raw format and this data isn’t feasible for the analysis. Therefore, certain steps are executed to convert the data into a small clean data set, this part of the process is called as data preprocessing.

Most of the real-world data is messy, some of these types of data are:

Missing data: Missing data can be found when it is not continuously created or due to technical issues in the application (IOT system).

Noisy Data This type of data is also called outliners, this can occur due to human errors (human manually gathering the data) or some technical problem of the device at the time of collection of data.

Inconsistent data: This type of data might be collected due to human errors (mistakes with the name or values) or duplication of data.

These are some of the basic pre processing techniques that can be used to convert raw data:

Conversion of data: As we know that Machine Learning models can only handle numeric features, hence categorical and ordinal data must be somehow converted into numeric features.

Ignoring the missing values: Whenever we encounter missing data in the data set then we can remove the row or column of data depending on our need. This method is known to be efficient but it shouldn’t be performed if there are a lot of missing values in the dataset.

Filling the missing values: Whenever we encounter missing data in the data set then we can fill the missing data manually, most commonly the mean, median or highest frequency value is used.

Machine learning: If we have some missing data then we can predict what data shall be present at the empty position by using the existing data.

Outliers detection: There are some error data that might be present in our data set that deviates drastically from other observations in a data set. [Example: human weight = 800 Kg; due to mistyping of extra 0]