Data Analysis
Multiple types of analytics provide organizations and people with information that can drive innovation, improve efficiency and mitigate risk.

Descriptive analytics- Relies solely on historical data to provide regular reports on events that have already happened.

Predictive analytics - Can infer missing data and establish a future trend line based on past data. It uses simulation models and forecasting to suggest what could happen.

Prescriptive analytics - Recommends actions or decisions based on a complex set of targets, constraints, and choices.
Exploratory Data Analysis
Exploratory data analysis is a set of procedures designed to produce descriptive and graphical summaries of data with the notion that the results may reveal interesting patterns.

Observations, Variables, and Values

A variable is anything that varies from one instance to another and is something that can be measured, manipulated or controlled.

The recordings of the values, patterns and occurrences for a set of variables is an observation.

The set of values for a specific observation is called a data point.

Categorical variables include:

Nominal – Two or more categories or names that identify the object

Ordinal – Two or more categories in which order matter in the value

Numerical variables include:

Continuous – quantitative along a continuum or range of values

Ratio - Interval variables where zero (0) means none

Discrete - Quantitative with a specific value from a finite set of values
Statistical Analysis
Statistics is the collection and analysis of data using mathematical techniques.

Sample and Population

A population is a group of similar entities such as people, objects, or events that share some common set of characteristics.

A sample is a representative group from the population.

Descriptive statistics:

Describe or summarize the values and observations of a data set.

Inferential statistics:

The process of collecting, analyzing and interpreting data gathered from a sample to make generalizations or predictions about a population.
Analysis using Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics summarize and organize characteristics of a data set. A data set is a collection of responses or observations from a sample or entire population.

Types of Descriptive Statistics

There are 3 main types of descriptive statistics:

The distribution concerns the frequency of each value.

The central tendency concerns the averages of the values.

The variability or dispersion concerns how spread out the values are.
Analysis Using Correlation
“Correlation does not imply causation”

Causation is a relationship in which one thing changes, or is created, directly because of something else.

Correlation is a relationship between phenomena in which two or more things change at a similar rate.

Correlations can be positive or negative.

Correlations can be calculated for multiple variables simultaneously.

Heat map values for correlation coefficients relate to one another.
Regression Analysis
Regression Analysis is one of the oldest and most commonly used statistical methods for analyzing data.

The main goal of regression is to qualify the mathematical relationship between one or more independent variables (predictor variable(s)), and a dependent one (target variable).