Data as an Asset
The chapter begins with a not very convincing argument that data is valuable because it can provide your company with competitive advantages. To have value, there must be something you can do with the information that can be derived from the data. In the graphic on page 723, the text illustrates a concept it calls thedata-information-decision cycle.

A body of data is analyzed by a human and/or software to become information. Are the decisions the company has made, and the actions it has taken producing revenue for the company?

Various kinds of information are combined to become a related body of knowledge.

The knowledge is used to make decisions about the business.

Actions are taken based on the decisions.

More data is gathered from and about the actions. This takes us back to step 1, where this data is reviewed in the next cycle.

On the next page, the text explores some causes ofdirty data, data that is incorrect.

failure to enforce entity integrity and referential integrity

human error in data entry

failure to stick with a chosen vocabulary, resulting in queries that are missing records they should have found

tables that are different from one project to another, from one system to another due to different perceptions of the data

Some of the errors above result in problems across the enterprise.Standardizationbecomes more important the larger the organization becomes. You can't just start out with good intentions and trust that everything will go well. Data assets need to beexaminedandchangedto meet standards, which includes keeping themcurrent. The text recommends setting up master copies of tables that are used in multiple system. Updates should be made to the master copy, then the other necessary copies should update from the master. This controls redundancy and sets a standard that other tables should follow.