The data anomalies created by the database organization shown in Figure 4 are easily eliminated by completing the following two steps:

Step 1: Make New Tables to Eliminate Transitive Dependencies

For every transitive dependency, write a copy of its determinant as a primary key for a new table. A determinant is any attribute whose value determines other values within a row. If you have three different transitive dependencies, you will have three different determinants. As with the conversion to 2NF, it is important that the determinant remain in the original table to serve as a foreign key. Figure 4 shows only one table that contains a transitive dependency. Therefore, write the determinant for this transitive dependency as:

JOB_CLASS

Step 2: Reassign Corresponding Dependent Attributes

Using Figure 4, identify the attributes that are dependent on each determinant identified in Step 1. Place the dependent attributes in the new tables with their determinants and remove them from their original tables. In this example, eliminate CHG_HOUR from the EMPLOYEE table shown in Figure 4 to leave the EMPLOYEE table dependency definition as:

EMP_NUM S EMP_NAME, JOB_CLASS

Draw a new dependency diagram to show all of the tables you have defined in Steps 1 and 2. Name the table to reflect its contents and function. In this case, JOB seems appropriate. Check all of the tables to make sure that each table has a determinant and that no table contains inappropriate dependencies. When you have completed these steps, you will see the results in Figure 5.

Figure 5. Third Normal Form (3NF) Conversion Results

Note that this conversion has eliminated the original EMPLOYEE table’s transitive dependency. The tables are now said to be in third normal form (3NF).

It is interesting to note the similarities between resolving 2NF and 3NF problems. To convert a table from 1NF to 2NF, it is necessary to remove the partial dependencies. To convert a table from 2NF to 3NF, it is necessary to remove the transitive dependencies. No matter whether the “problem” dependency is a partial dependency or a transitive dependency, the solution is the same: create a new table for each problem dependency.

The determinant of the problem dependency remains in the original table and is placed as the primary key of the new table. The dependents of the problem dependency are removed from the original table and placed as nonprime attributes in the new table.