Figure 1. Base Data for a Construction Company Report

A repeating group derives its name from the fact that a group of multiple entries of the same or multiple types can exist for any single key attribute occurrence. In Figure 6.1, note that each single project number (PROJ_NUM) occurrence can reference a group of related data in the employee number, employee name, job classification, and charge per hour columns. For example, the Evergreen project (PROJ_NUM = 15) contains five values for each of those attributes at this point.

Step 1: Eliminating the Repeating Groups

Start by presenting the data in a tabular format, where each cell has a single value and there are no repeating groups. To eliminate the repeating groups, change the table from a project focus to an assignment focus. This will create separate rows for each employee assigned to each project, converting the multivalued attributes into single-valued attributes. This change converts the table in Figure 1 to 1NF as shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. A table in First Normal Form

Step 2: Identify the Primary Key

The layout in Figure 2 represents more than a mere cosmetic change. Even a casual observer will note that PROJ_NUM is not an adequate primary key because the project number does not uniquely identify each row. For example, the PROJ_NUM value 15 can identify any one of five rows containing employees who work on the Evergreen project. To maintain a proper primary key that will uniquely identify any attribute value, the new key must be composed of a combination of PROJ_NUM and EMP_NUM. For example, using the data shown in Figure 2, if you know that PROJ_NUM = 15 and EMP_NUM = 103, the entries for the attributes PROJ_ NAME, EMP_NAME, JOB_CLASS, CHG_HOUR, and HOURS must be Evergreen, June E. Arbough, Elect. Engineer, $84.50, and 23.8, respectively.

Step 3: Identify All Dependencies

The identification of the PK in Step 2 means that you have already identified the following dependency:

PROJ_NUM, EMP_NUM --> PROJ_NAME, EMP_NAME, JOB_CLASS, CHG_HOUR, HOURS

That is, the PROJ_NAME, EMP_NAME, JOB_CLASS, CHG_HOUR, and HOURS values are all dependent on—they are determined by—the combination of PROJ_NUM and EMP_NUM.

Achieving 1NF is not sufficient to address all of the anomalies that existed in the original structure. 1NF has dealt with the repeating groups and ensured that our table conforms to the requirements for a relational table, as described in the previous modules. However, anomalies remain. For example, each time another employee is assigned to a project, some data entries (such as PROJ_NAME, EMP_NAME, and CHG_HOUR) are unnecessarily repeated.

The anomalies that remain exist because there are additional dependencies in addition to the primary key dependency. For example, the project number determines the project name. In other words, the project name is dependent on the project number. You can write that dependency as:

PROJ_NUM --> PROJ_NAME

Also, if you know an employee number, you also know that employee’s name, job classification, and charge per hour. Therefore, you can identify the dependency shown next:

EMP_NUM --> EMP_NAME, JOB_CLASS, CHG_HOUR

In simpler terms, an employee has the following attributes: a number, a name, a job classification, and a charge per hour.

By further studying the data in Figure 2, you can see that knowing the job classification means knowing the charge per hour for that job classification. (Notice that all System Analyst or Programmer positions have the same charge per hour regardless of the project or employee.) In other words, the charge per hour depends on the job classification, not the employee. Therefore, you can identify one last dependency:

JOB_CLASS --> CHG_HOUR

However, this dependency exists between two nonprime attributes; therefore, it is a signal that a transitive dependency exists, and we will refer to it as a transitive dependency. The dependencies you have just examined can also be depicted with the help of the diagram shown in Figure 3. Because such a diagram depicts all dependencies found within a given table structure, it is known as a dependency diagram. Dependency diagrams are very helpful in getting a bird’s-eye view of all the relationships among a table’s attributes, and their use makes it less likely that you will overlook an important dependency.

Figure 3. First Normal Form (1NF) Dependency Diagram

The following features of a dependency diagram are listed below:

The primary key attributes are bold, underlined, and in a different color.

The arrows above the attributes indicate all desirable dependencies—that is, dependencies based on the primary key. In this case, note that the entity’s attributes are dependent on the combination of PROJ_NUM and EMP_NUM.

The arrows below the dependency diagram indicate fewer desirable dependencies. Two types of such dependencies exist:

Partial dependencies. You need to know only the PROJ_NUM to determine the PROJ_NAME; that is, the PROJ_NAME is dependent on only part of the primary key. Also, you need to know only the EMP_NUM to find the EMP_NAME, the JOB_CLASS, and the CHG_HOUR. A dependency based on only a part of a composite primary key is a partial dependency.

Transitive dependencies. Note that CHG_HOUR is dependent on JOB_CLASS. Because neither CHG_HOUR nor JOB_CLASS is a prime attribute—that is, neither attribute is at least part of a key—the condition is indicative of a transitive dependency. In other words, a transitive dependency exists when a functional dependency exists only among nonprime attributes. Transitive dependencies yield data anomalies.

Although partial dependencies are sometimes used for performance reasons, they should be used with caution because a table that contains partial dependencies is still subject to data redundancies, and therefore to various anomalies. Our example still has the following anomalies:

Update anomalies. Modifying the JOB_CLASS for employee Annelise Jones requires updating many entries; otherwise, it will generate data inconsistencies.

Insertion anomalies. Adding a new employee requires the employee to be assigned to a project and therefore to enter duplicate project information. If the employee is not yet assigned to a project, a phantom project must be created to complete the employee data entry.

Deletion anomalies. Suppose that only one employee is associated with a given project. If that employee is deleted, the project information will also be deleted.

The data redundancies occur because every row entry requires duplication of data. Such duplication of effort is very inefficient, and it helps create data anomalies; nothing prevents the user from typing slightly different versions of the employee name, position, or hourly pay. For instance, the employee name for EMP_NUM = 102 might be entered as Dave Senior or D. Senior. The project name might also be entered correctly as Evergreen or misspelled as Evergeen. Such data anomalies violate the relational database’s integrity and consistency rules.