The objective of normalization is to ensure that each table conforms to the concept of well-formed relations— in other words, tables that have the following characteristics:

Each relation (table) represents a single subject. For example, a COURSE table will contain only data that directly pertain to courses. Similarly, a STUDENT table will contain only student data.

Each row/column intersection contains only one value and not a group of values.

No data item will be unnecessarily stored in more than one table (tables have minimum controlled redundancy). The reason for this requirement is to ensure that the data is updated in only one place.

All nonprime attributes in a relation (table) are dependent on the primary key—the entire primary key and nothing but the primary key. The reason for this requirement is to ensure that the data is uniquely identifiable by a primary key value.

Each relation (table) has no insertion, update, or deletion anomalies, which ensures the integrity and consistency of the data.

The most common normal forms and their basic characteristics are listed in the table below.

Table 1. Normal Forms

Before outlining the normalization process, it is a good idea to review the concepts of determination and functional dependence that were covered in detail in the previous modules. Table 2 summarizes the main concepts.

Table 2. Functional Dependence Concepts

A partial dependency exists when there is a functional dependence in which the determinant is only part of the primary key (remember the assumption, for this discussion, that there is only one candidate key). For example, if (A, B) --> (C, D), B --> C, and (A, B) is the primary key, then the functional dependence B --> C is a partial dependency because only part of the primary key (B) is needed to determine the value of C. Partial dependencies tend to be straightforward and easy to identify.

A transitive dependency exists when there are functional dependencies such that X--> Y, Y --> Z, and X is the primary key. In that case, the dependency X --> Z is a transitive dependency because X determines the value of Z via Y. Unlike partial dependencies, transitive dependencies are more difficult to identify among a set of data. Fortunately, there is an effective way to identify transitive dependencies: they occur only when a functional dependence exists among nonprime attributes. In the previous example, the actual transitive dependency is X --> Z. However, the dependency Y --> Z signals that a transitive dependency exists.