Conversion to 2NF occurs only when the 1NF has a composite primary key. If the 1NF has a single-attribute primary key, then the table is automatically in 2NF. The 1NF-to- 2NF conversion is simple. Starting with the 1NF format displayed in Figure 3, you take the following steps:

Step 1: Make New Tables to Eliminate Partial Dependencies

For each component of the primary key that acts as a determinant in a partial dependency, create a new table with a copy of that component as the primary key. While these components are placed in the new tables, it is important that they also remain in the original table as well. The determinants must remain in the original table because they will be the foreign keys for the relationships needed to relate these new tables to the original table. To construct the revised dependency diagram, write each key component on a separate line and then write the original (composite) key on the last line. For example:

PROJ_NUM

EMP_NUM

PROJ_NUM EMP_NUM

Each component will become the key in a new table. In other words, the original table is now divided into three tables (PROJECT, EMPLOYEE, and ASSIGNMENT).

Step 2: Reassign Corresponding Dependent Attributes

Use Figure 3 to determine attributes that are dependent in the partial dependencies. The dependencies for the original key components are found by examining the arrows below the dependency diagram shown in Figure 3. The attributes that are dependent in a partial dependency are removed from the original table and placed in the new table with the dependency’s determinant. Any attributes that are not dependent in a partial dependency will remain in the original table. In other words, the three tables that result from the conversion to 2NF are given appropriate names (PROJECT, EMPLOYEE, and ASSIGNMENT) and are described by the following relational schemas:

PROJECT (PROJ_NUM, PROJ_NAME)

EMPLOYEE (EMP_NUM, EMP_NAME, JOB_CLASS, CHG_HOUR)

ASSIGNMENT (PROJ_NUM, EMP_NUM, ASSIGN_HOURS)

Because the number of hours spent on each project by each employee is dependent on both PROJ_NUM and EMP_NUM in the ASSIGNMENT table, you leave those hours in the ASSIGNMENT table as ASSIGN_HOURS. Notice that the ASSIGNMENT table contains a composite primary key composed of the attributes PROJ_NUM and EMP_NUM. Notice that by leaving the determinants in the original table as well as making them the primary keys of the new tables, primary key/foreign key relationships have been created.

The results of Steps 1 and 2 are displayed in Figure 4. At this point, most of the anomalies discussed earlier have been eliminated. For example, if you now want to add, change, or delete a PROJECT record, you need to go only to the PROJECT table and make the change to only one row. Because a partial dependency can exist only when a table’s primary key is composed of several attributes, a table whose primary key consists of only a single attribute is automatically in 2NF once it is in 1NF.

Figure 4. Second Normal Form (2NF) Conversion Results

Figure 4 still shows a transitive dependency, which can generate anomalies. For example, if the charge per hour changes for a job classification held by many employees, that change must be made for each of those employees. If you forget to update some of the employee records that are affected by the charge per hour change, different employees with the same job description will generate different hourly charges.