Tables in 3NF will perform suitably in business transactional databases. However, higher normal forms are sometimes useful. In this section, you will learn about a special case of 3NF, known as Boyce-Codd normal form, and about fourth normal form (4NF).

The Boyce-Codd Normal Form

A table is in Boyce-Codd normal form (BCNF) when every determinant in the table is a candidate key. (Recall from the previous modules that a candidate key has the same characteristics as a primary key, but for some reason, it was not chosen to be the primary key.) Clearly, when a table contains only one candidate key, the 3NF and the BCNF are equivalent. In other words, BCNF can be violated only when the table contains more than one candidate key. In the previous normal form examples, tables with only one candidate key were used to simplify the explanations. Remember, however, that multiple candidate keys are always possible, and normalization rules focus on candidate keys, not just the primary key.

Figure 5. Tables with Multiple Candidate Keys

The CLASS table has two candidate keys:

CLASS_CODE

CRS_CODE + CLASS_SECTION

The table is in 1NF because the key attributes are defined and all nonkey attributes are determined by the key. This is true for both candidate keys. Both candidate keys ave been identified, and all of the other attributes can be determined by either candidate key. The table is in 2NF because it is in 1NF and there are no partial dependencies on either candidate key. Since CLASS_CODE is a single attribute candidate key, the issue of partial dependencies doesn’t apply. However, the composite candidate key of CRS_CODE + CLASS_SECTION could potentially have a partial dependency, so 2NF must be evaluated for that candidate key. In this case, there are no partial dependencies involving the composite key. Finally, the table is in 3NF because there are no transitive dependencies. Remember, because CRS_CODE + CLASS_SECTION is a candidate key, the fact that this composite can determine the CLASS_TIME and ROOM_CODE is not a transitive dependency. A transitive dependency exists when a nonkey attribute can determine another nonkey attribute, and CRS_CODE + CLASS_SECTION is a key.

Take note that a table is in Boyce-Codd normal form (BCNF) when every determinant in the table is a candidate key.

Forth Normal Form (4NF)

Consider the possibility that an employee can have multiple assignments and can also be involved in multiple service organizations. Suppose employee 10123 volunteers for the Red Cross and United Way. In addition, the same employee might be assigned to work on three projects: 1, 3, and 4. Figure 6 illustrates how that set of facts can be recorded in very different ways.

Figure 6. Tables with Multivalued Dependencies

There is a problem with the tables in Figure 6. The attributes ORG_CODE and ASSIGN_NUM each may have many different values. In normalization terminology, this situation is referred to as a multivalued dependency, which occurs when one key determines multiple values of two other attributes and those attributes are independent of each other. The presence of a multivalued dependency means that if table versions 1 and 2 are implemented, the tables are likely to contain quite a few null values; in fact, the tables do not even have a viable candidate key. (The EMP_NUM values are not unique, so they cannot be PKs. No combination of the attributes in table versions 1 and 2 can be used to create a PK because some of them contain nulls.)

The solution is to eliminate the problems caused by the multivalued dependency. You do this by creating new tables for the components of the multivalued dependency. In this example, the multivalued dependency is resolved and eliminated by creating the ASSIGNMENT and SERVICE_V1 tables depicted in Figure 7. Those tables are said to be in 4NF.

Figure 7. A set of tables in 4NF

The discussion of 4NF is largely academic if you make sure that your tables conform to the following two rules:

All attributes must be dependent on the primary key, but they must be independent of each other.

No row may contain two or more multivalued facts about an entity.