Introduction

Sooner or later, when working with images, you will find yourself in need of altering images: be it applying artistic filters, extrapolating certain sections, cutting, pasting, or whatever else your mind can conjure. This chapter presents some techniques to alter images, and by the end of it, you should be able to perform tasks, such as detecting skin tone in an image, sharpening an image, mark contours of subjects, and detecting crosswalks using a line segment detector.

There are literally hundreds of methods in OpenCV that pertain to the conversion of color spaces. In general, three color spaces are prevalent in modern day computer vision: gray, BGR, and Hue, Saturation, Value (HSV).

Gray is a color space that effectively eliminates color information translating to shades of gray: this color space is extremely useful for intermediate processing, such as face detection.

BGR is the blue-green-red color space, in which each pixel is a three-element array, each value representing the blue, green, and red colors: web developers would be familiar with a similar definition of colors, except the order of colors is RGB.

In HSV, hue is a color tone, saturation is the intensity of a color, and value represents its darkness (or brightness at the opposite end of the spectrum).

A quick note on BGR

The [0 255 255] value (no blue, full green, and full red) produces the yellow color. If you have an artistic background, you won't even need to pick up paints and brushes to witness green and red mix into a muddy shade of brown. That is because the color model used in computing is called an additive and deals with lights. Lights behave differently from paints (which follow the subtractive color model), and—as software runs on computers whose medium is a monitor that emits light—the color model of reference is the additive one.