Much of the processing you apply to images and videos in OpenCV involves the concept of Fourier Transform in some capacity. Joseph Fourier was an 18th century French mathematician who discovered and popularized many mathematical concepts, and concentrated his work on studying the laws governing heat, and in mathematics, all things waveform. In particular, he observed that all waveforms are just the sum of simple sinusoids of different frequencies.

In other words, the waveforms you observe all around you are the sum of other waveforms. This concept is incredibly useful when manipulating images, because it allows us to identify regions in images where a signal (such as image pixels) changes a lot, and regions where the change is less dramatic. We can then arbitrarily mark these regions as noise or regions of interests, background or foreground, and so on. These are the frequencies that make up the original image, and we have the power to separate them to make sense of the image and extrapolate interesting data.

Let's examine the magnitude spectrum concept of an image using Fourier
Transform. The magnitude spectrum of an image is another image, which gives a representation of the original image in terms of its changes: think of it as taking an image and dragging all the brightest pixels to the center. Then, you gradually work your way out to the border where all the darkest pixels have been pushed. Immediately, you will be able to see how many light and dark pixels are contained in your image and the percentage of their distribution.

The concept of Fourier Transform is the basis of many algorithms used for common image processing operations, such as edge detection or line and shape detection.

Before examining these in detail, let's take a look at two concepts that—in conjunction with the Fourier Transform—form the foundation of the aforementioned processing operations: high pass filters and low pass filters.