A high pass filter (HPF) is a filter that examines a region of an image and boosts the intensity of certain pixels based on the difference in the intensity with the surrounding pixels.

Take, for example, the following kernel:
[[0, -0.25, 0],
[-0.25, 1, -0.25],
[0, -0.25, 0]]
A kernel is a set of weights that are applied to a region in a source image to generate a single pixel in the destination image. For example, a ksize of 7 implies that 49 (7 x 7) source pixels are considered in generating each destination pixel. We can think of a kernel as a piece of frosted glass moving over the source image and letting through a diffused blend of the source's light.

After calculating the sum of differences of the intensities of the central pixel compared to all the immediate neighbors, the intensity of the central pixel will be boosted (or not) if a high level of changes are found. In other words, if a pixel stands out from the surrounding pixels, it will get boosted.

This is particularly effective in edge detection, where a common form of HPF called high boost filter is used.

Both high pass and low pass filters use a property called radius, which extends the area of the neighbors involved in the filter calculation.

Let's go through an example of an HPF:
import cv2
import numpy as np
from scipy import ndimage

kernel_3x3 = np.array([[-1, -1, -1],
[-1, 8, -1],
[-1, -1, -1]])

kernel_5x5 = np.array([[-1, -1, -1, -1, -1],
[-1, 1, 2, 1, -1],
[-1, 2, 4, 2, -1],
[-1, 1, 2, 1, -1],
[-1, -1, -1, -1, -1]])

img = cv2.imread("../images/color1_small.jpg", 0)

k3 = ndimage.convolve(img, kernel_3x3)
k5 = ndimage.convolve(img, kernel_5x5)

blurred = cv2.GaussianBlur(img, (11,11), 0)
g_hpf = img - blurred

cv2.imshow("3x3", k3)
cv2.imshow("5x5", k5)
cv2.imshow("g_hpf", g_hpf)
cv2.waitKey()
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
After the initial imports, we define a 3x3 kernel and a 5x5 kernel, and then we load the image in grayscale. Normally, the majority of image processing is done with NumPy; however, in this particular case, we want to "convolve" an image with a given kernel and NumPy happens to only accept one-dimensional arrays.

This does not mean that the convolution of deep arrays can't be achieved with NumPy, just that it would be a bit complex. Instead, ndimage, makes this trivial, through its convolve() function, which supports the
classic NumPy arrays that the cv2 modules use to store images.

We apply two HPFs with the two convolution kernels we defined. Lastly, we also implement a differential method of obtaining a HPF by applying a low pass filter and calculating the difference with the original image. You will notice that the third method actually yields the best result, so let's also elaborate on low pass filters.