Computational Models

Using computation to help understand the world in which we live

Experimental devices that help us to understand something that has happened or to predict the future

Optimization models

Statistical models

Simulation models

What Is an Optimization Model?

An objective function that is to be maximized or minimized, e.g., Minimize time spent traveling from New York to Boston

A set of constraints (possibly empty) that must be honored, e.g.,

Cannot spend more than $100

Must be in Boston before 5:00PM

Takeaways

Many problems of real importance can be formulated as an optimization problem

Reducing a seemingly new problem to an instance of a well-known problem allows one to use pre-existing methods for solving them

Solving optimization problems is computationally challenging

A greedy algorithm is often a practical approach to finding a pretty good approximate solution to an optimization problem

Knapsack and Bin-packing Problems

Knapsack Problem

You have limited strength, so there is a maximum weight knapsack that you can carry

You would like to take more stuff than you can carry

How do you choose which stuff to take and which to leave behind?

Two variants

0/1 knapsack problem

Continuous or fractional knapsack problem

My Least-favorite Knapsack Problem

0/1 Knapsack Problem

Each item is represented by a pair, <value, weight>

The knapsack can accommodate items with a total weight of no more than w

A vector, L, of length n, represents the set of available items. Each element of the vector is an item

A vector, V, of length n, is used to indicate whether or not items are taken. If V[i] = 1, item I[i] is taken. If V[i] = 0, item I[i] is not taken

Brute Force Algorithm

1. Enumerate all possible combinations of items. That is to say, generate all subsets of the set of subjects. This is called the power set.

2. Remove all of the combinations whose total units exceeds the allowed weight.

3. From the remaining combinations choose any one whose value is the largest.

Greedy Algorithm

while knapsack not full

put “best” available item in knapsack

But what does best mean?

Most valuable

Least expensive

Highest value/units

The Pros and Cons of Greedy

Easy to implement

Computationally efficient

But does not always yield the best solution

Don’t even know how good the approximation is