The study of computational techniques to assist computers in comprehending and interpreting the content of digital images and videos is known as computer vision (CV), and it is a sub-field of artificial intelligence (AI). Thus, the goal of computer vision is to enable computers to perceive and comprehend visual data coming from cameras or other sensors.

By giving computers the ability to meaningfully interpret visual stimuli, computer vision seeks to artificially mimic human vision. As a result, it is also known as machine perception or machine vision. Even though humans can easily solve the "vision" problem, computational vision is still one of the most difficult areas in computer science to master. This is mostly because of the physical world's immense complexity.

In order to assess thousands of items or processes in real-time and detect flaws or problems, computer vision systems are trained to examine products, monitor infrastructure, or observe a manufacturing asset. It can swiftly outperform human talents because of its speed, impartiality, continuity, correctness, and scalability. The most recent deep learning models perform and attain accuracy and performance above human levels in practical image recognition tasks as object detection, facial recognition, and image classification. Security, medical imaging, manufacturing, automotive, agriculture, construction, smart cities, transportation, and many other industries employ computer vision applications. Significantly more use cases are now feasible and profitable as AI technology develops and becomes more adaptable and scalable.

references: https://viso.ai/computer-vision/what-is-computer-vision/