x86 Data Types

The x86 can deal with data types of 8 (byte), 16 (word), 32 (doubleword), 64 (quadword), and 128 (double quadword) bits in length. To allow maximum flexibility in data structures and efficient memory utilization, words need not be aligned at even- numbered addresses; doublewords need not be aligned at addresses evenly divisible by 4; quadwords need not be aligned at addresses evenly divisible by 8; and so on. However, when data are accessed across a 32-bit bus, data transfers take place in units of doublewords, beginning at addresses divisible by 4. The processor converts the request for misaligned values into a sequence of requests for the bus transfer. As with all of the Intel 80x86 machines, the x86 uses the little- endian style; that is, the least significant byte is stored in the lowest address.

The byte, word, doubleword, quadword, and double quadword are referred to as general data types. In addition, the x86 supports an impressive array of specific data types that are recognized and operated on by particular instructions. Table below summarizes these types. .

Figure below illustrates the x86 numerical data types. The signed integers are in twos complement representation and may be 16, 32, or 64 bits long. The floating- point type actually refers to a set of types that are used by the floating- point unit and operated on by floating- point instructions. The floating- point representations conform to the IEEE 754 standard.

The packed SIMD ( single- instruction- multiple- data) data types were introduced to the x86 architecture as part of the extensions of the instruction set to optimize performance of multimedia applications. These extensions include MMX (multimedia extensions) and SSE (streaming SIMD extensions). The basic concept is that multiple operands are packed into a single referenced memory item and that these multiple operands are operated on in parallel. The data types are as follows:

■ Packed byte and packed byte integer: Bytes packed into a 64-bit quadword or 128-bit double quadword, interpreted as a bit field or as an integer.

■ Packed word and packed word integer: 16-bit words packed into a 64-bit quadword or 128-bit double quadword, interpreted as a bit field or as an integer.

■ Packed doubleword and packed doubleword integer: 32-bit doublewords packed into a 64-bit quadword or 128-bit double quadword, interpreted as a bit field or as an integer.

■ Packed quadword and packed quadword integer: Two 64-bit quadwords packed into a 128-bit double quadword, interpreted as a bit field or as an integer.

■ Packed single- precision floating- point and packed double- precision floatingpoint: Four 32-bit floating- point or two 64-bit floating- point values packed into a 128-bit double quadword.

ARM Data Types

ARM processors support data types of 8 (byte), 16 (halfword), and 32 (word) bits in length. Normally, halfword access should be halfword aligned and word accesses should be word aligned. For nonaligned access attempts, the architecture supports three alternatives.

■ Default case:

– The address is treated as truncated, with address bits[1:0] treated as zero for word accesses, and address bit[0] treated as zero for halfword accesses.

– Load single word ARM instructions are architecturally defined to rotate right the word- aligned data transferred by a non word- aligned address one, two, or three bytes depending on the value of the two least significant address bits.

■ Alignment checking: When the appropriate control bit is set, a data abort signal indicates an alignment fault for attempting unaligned access.

■ Unaligned access: When this option is enabled, the processor uses one or more memory accesses to generate the required transfer of adjacent bytes transparently to the programmer.

For all three data types (byte, halfword, and word) an unsigned interpretation is supported, in which the value represents an unsigned, nonnegative integer. All three data types can also be used for twos complement signed integers. The majority of ARM processor implementations do not provide floating- point hardware, which saves power and area. If floating- point arithmetic is required in such processors, it must be implemented in software. ARM does support an optional floating- point coprocessor that supports the single- and double- precision floating point data types defined in IEEE 754.

ENDIAN SUPPORT

A state bit ( E- bit) in the system control register is set and cleared under program control using the SETEND instruction. The E- bit defines which endian to load and store data. Figure below illustrates the functionality associated with the E- bit for a word load or store operation. This mechanism enables efficient dynamic data load/store for system designers who know they need to access data structures in the opposite endianness to their OS/environment. Note that the address of each data byte is fixed in memory. However, the byte lane in a register is different.