x86 Operation Types

The x86 provides a complex array of operation types, including a number of specialized instructions. The intent was to provide tools for the compiler writer to produce optimized machine language translation of high- level language programs. Most of these are the conventional instructions found in most machine instruction sets, but several types of instructions are tailored to the x86 architecture and are of particular interest. Appendix A of [CART06] lists the x86 instructions, together with the operands for each and the effect of the instruction on the condition codes.

CALL/RETURN INSTRUCTIONS

The x86 provides four instructions to support procedure call/return: CALL, ENTER, LEAVE, RETURN. It will be instructive to look at the support provided by these instructions. Recall from Figure below that a common means of implementing the procedure call/return mechanism is via the use of stack frames.

When a new procedure is called, the following must be performed upon entry to the new procedure:

■ Push the return point on the stack.

■ Push the current frame pointer on the stack.

■ Copy the stack pointer as the new value of the frame pointer.

■ Adjust the stack pointer to allocate a frame.

The CALL instruction pushes the current instruction pointer value onto the stack and causes a jump to the entry point of the procedure by placing the address of the entry point in the instruction pointer. In the 8088 and 8086 machines, the typical procedure began with the sequence

PUSH EBP

MOV EBP, ESP

SUB ESP, space_for_locals

where EBP is the frame pointer and ESP is the stack pointer. In the 80286 and later machines, the ENTER instruction performs all the aforementioned operations in a single instruction. The ENTER instruction was added to the instruction set to provide direct support for the compiler. The instruction also includes a feature for support of what are called nested procedures in languages such as Pascal, COBOL, and Ada (not found in C or FORTRAN).

It turns out that there are better ways of handling nested procedure calls for these languages. Furthermore, although the ENTER instruction saves a few bytes of memory compared with the PUSH, MOV, SUB sequence (4 bytes versus 6 bytes), it actually takes longer to execute (10 clock cycles versus 6 clock cycles). Thus, although it may have seemed a good idea to the instruction set designers to add this feature, it complicates the implementation of the processor while providing little or no benefit. We will see that, in contrast, a RISC approach to processor design would avoid complex instructions such as ENTER and might produce a more efficient implementation with a sequence of simpler instructions.

MEMORY MANAGEMENT

Another set of specialized instructions deals with memory segmentation. These are privileged instructions that can only be executed from the operating system. They allow local and global segment tables (called descriptor tables) to be loaded and read, and for the privilege level of a segment to be checked and altered. The special instructions for dealing with the on- chip cache were discussed in module 4.

STATUS FLAGS AND CONDITION CODES

Status flags are bits in special registers that may be set by certain operations and used in conditional branch instructions. The term condition code refers to the settings of one or more status flags. In the x86 and many other architectures, status flags are set by arithmetic and compare operations. The compare operation in most languages subtracts two operands, as does a subtract operation. The difference is that a compare operation only sets status flags, whereas a subtract operation also stores the result of the subtraction in the destination operand. Some architectures also set status flags for data transfer instructions.

Table above lists the status flags used on the x86. Each flag, or combinations of these flags, can be tested for a conditional jump. Table below, on the other hand, shows the condition codes (combinations of status flag values) for which conditional jump opcodes have been defined.

Several interesting observations can be made about this list. First, we may wish to test two operands to determine if one number is bigger than another. But this will depend on whether the numbers are signed or unsigned. For example, the 8-bit number 11111111 is bigger than 00000000 if the two numbers are interpreted as unsigned integers (255 7 0) but is less if they are considered as 8-bit twos complement numbers (-1 6 0). Many assembly languages therefore introduce two sets of terms to distinguish the two cases: If we are comparing two numbers as signed integers, we use the terms less than and greater than; if we are comparing them as unsigned integers, we use the terms below and above.

A second observation concerns the complexity of comparing signed integers. A signed result is greater than or equal to zero if (1) the sign bit is zero and there is no overflow (S = 0 AND O = 0), or (2) the sign bit is one and there is an overflow.

X86 SIMD INSTRUCTIONS

In 1996, Intel introduced MMX technology into its Pentium product line. MMX is set of highly optimized instructions for multimedia tasks. There are 57 new instructions that treat data in a SIMD ( single- instruction,  multiple- data) fashion, which makes it possible to perform the same operation, such as addition or multiplication, on multiple data elements at once. Each instruction typically takes a single clock cycle to execute. For the proper application, these fast parallel operations can yield a speedup of two to eight times over comparable algorithms that do not use the MMX instructions [ATKI96]. With the introduction of 64-bit x86 architecture, Intel has expanded this extension to include double quadword (128 bits) operands and floating- point operations. In this subsection, we describe the MMX features.

The focus of MMX is multimedia programming. Video and audio data are typically composed of large arrays of small data types, such as 8 or 16 bits, whereas conventional instructions are tailored to operate on 32- or 64-bit data. Here are some examples: In graphics and video, a single scene consists of an array of pixels,2 and there are 8 bits for each pixel or 8 bits for each pixel color component (red, green, blue). Typical audio samples are quantized using 16 bits. For some 3D graphics algorithms, 32 bits are common for basic data types. To provide for parallel operation on these data lengths, three new data types are defined in MMX. Each data type is 64 bits in length and consists of multiple smaller data fields, each of which holds a fixed- point integer. The types are as follows:

■ Packed byte: Eight bytes packed into one 64-bit quantity.

■ Packed word: Four 16-bit words packed into 64 bits.

■ Packed doubleword: Two 32-bit doublewords packed into 64 bits.

Table below lists the MMX instruction set. Most of the instructions involve parallel operation on bytes, words, or doublewords. For example, the PSLLW instruction performs a left logical shift separately on each of the four words in the packed word operand; the PADDB instruction takes packed byte operands as input and performs parallel additions on each byte position independently to produce a packed byte output.

One unusual feature of the new instruction set is the introduction of saturation arithmetic for byte and 16-bit word operands. With ordinary unsigned arithmetic, when an operation overflows (i.e., a carry out of the most significant bit), the extra bit is truncated. This is referred to as wraparound, because the effect of the truncation can be, for example, to produce an addition result that is smaller than the two input operands. Consider the addition of the two words, in hexadecimal, F000h and 3000h. The sum would be expressed as:

If the two numbers represented image intensity, then the result of the addition is to make the combination of two dark shades turn out to be lighter. This is typically not what is intended. With saturation arithmetic, if addition results in overflow or subtraction results in underflow, the result is set to the largest or smallest value representable. For the preceding example, with saturation arithmetic, we have

To provide a feel for the use of MMX instructions, we look at an example, taken from [PELE97]. A common video application is the fade- out, fade- in effect, in which one scene gradually dissolves into another. Two images are combined with a weighted average:

Result_pixel = A_pixel * fade + B_pixel * (1 - fade)

This calculation is performed on each pixel position in A and B. If a series of video frames is produced while gradually changing the fade value from 1 to 0 (scaled appropriately for an 8-bit integer), the result is to fade from image A to image B. Figure below shows the sequence of steps required for one set of pixels.

The 8-bit pixel components are converted to 16-bit elements to accommodate the MMX 16-bit multiply capability. If these images use 640 * 480 resolution, and the dissolve technique uses all 255 possible values of the fade value, then the total number of  Instructions executed using MMX is 535 million. The same calculation, performed without the MMX instructions, requires 1.4 billion instruction executions.

ARM Operation Types

The ARM architecture provides a large collection of operation types. The following are the principal categories:

■ Load and store instructions: In the ARM architecture, only load and store instructions access memory locations; arithmetic and logical instructions are performed only on registers and immediate values encoded in the instruction. This limitation is characteristic of RISC design and it is explored further in module 15. The ARM architecture supports two broad types of instruction that load or store the value of a single register, or a pair of registers, from or to memory: (1) load or store a 32-bit word or an 8-bit unsigned byte, and (2) load or store a 16-bit unsigned halfword, and load and sign extend a 16-bit halfword or an 8-bit byte.

■ Branch instructions: ARM supports a branch instruction that allows a conditional branch forwards or backwards up to 32 MB. A subroutine call can be performed by a variant of the standard branch instruction. As well as allowing a branch forward or backward up to 32 MB, the Branch with Link (BL) instruction preserves the address of the instruction after the branch (the return address) in the LR (R14). Branches are determined by a 4-bit condition field in the instruction.

■ Data- processing instructions: This category includes logical instructions (AND, OR, XOR), add and subtract instructions, and test and compare instructions.

■ Multiply instructions: The integer multiply instructions operate on word or halfword operands and can produce normal or long results. For example, there is a multiply instruction that takes two 32-bit operands and produces a 64-bit result.

■ Parallel addition and subtraction instructions: In addition to the normal data processing and multiply instructions, there are a set of parallel addition and subtraction instructions, in which portions of two operands are operated on in parallel. For example, ADD16 adds the top halfwords of two registers to form the top halfword of the result and adds the bottom halfwords of the same two registers to form the bottom halfword of the result. These instructions are useful in image processing applications, similar to the x86 MMX instructions.

■ Extend instructions: There are several instructions for unpacking data by sign or zero extending bytes to halfwords or words, and halfwords to words.

■ Status register access instructions: ARM provides the ability to read and also to write portions of the status register.

CONDITION CODES

The ARM architecture defines four condition flags that are stored in the program status register: N, Z, C, and V (Negative, Zero, Carry and oVerflow), with meanings essentially the same as the S, Z, C, and V flags in the x86 architecture. These four flags constitute a condition code in ARM. Table below shows the combination of conditions for which conditional execution is defined.

There are two unusual aspects to the use of condition codes in ARM:

1. All instructions, not just branch instructions, include a condition code field, which means that virtually all instructions may be conditionally executed. Any combination of flag settings except 1110 or 1111 in an instruction’s condition code field signifies that the instruction will be executed only if the condition is met.

2. All data processing instructions (arithmetic, logical) include an S bit that signifies whether the instruction updates the condition flags.

The use of conditional execution and conditional setting of the condition flags helps in the design of shorter programs that use less memory. On the other hand, all instructions include 4 bits for the condition code, so there is a trade- off in that fewer bits in the 32-bit instruction are available for opcode and operands. Because the ARM is a RISC design that relies heavily on register addressing, this seems to be a reasonable trade- off.