The number of different opcodes varies widely from machine to machine. However, the same general types of operations are found on all machines. A useful and typical categorization is the following:

■ Data transfer

■ Arithmetic

■ Logical

■ Conversion

■ I/O

■ System control

■ Transfer of control

The table  below lists common instruction types in each category. This section provides a brief survey of these various types of operations, together with a brief discussion of the actions taken by the processor to execute a particular type of operation . The latter topic is examined in more detail in  module 14.

Data Transfer

The most fundamental type of machine instruction is the data transfer instruction. The data transfer instruction must specify several things. First, the location of the source and destination operands must be specified. Each location could be memory, a register, or the top of the stack. Second, the length of data to be transferred must be indicated. Third, as with all instructions with operands, the mode of addressing for each operand must be specified. This latter point is discussed in module 13.

The choice of data transfer instructions to include in an instruction set exemplifies the kinds of trade- offs the designer must make. For example, the general location (memory or register) of an operand can be indicated in either the specification of the opcode or the operand. Table below shows examples of the most common IBM EAS/390 data transfer instructions.

Note that there are variants to indicate the amount of data to be transferred (8, 16, 32, or 64 bits). Also, there are different instructions for register to register, register to memory, memory to register, and memory to memory transfers. In contrast, the VAX has a move (MOV) instruction with variants for different amounts of data to be moved, but it specifies whether an operand is register or memory as part of the operand. The VAX approach is somewhat easier for the programmer, who has fewer mnemonics to deal with. However, it is also somewhat less compact than the IBM EAS/390 approach because the location (register versus memory) of each operand must be specified separately in the instruction. We will return to this distinction when we discuss instruction formats in module 13.

In terms of processor action, data transfer operations are perhaps the simplest type. If both source and destination are registers, then the processor simply causes data to be transferred from one register to another; this is an operation internal to the processor. If one or both operands are in memory, then the processor must perform some or all of the following actions:

1. Calculate the memory address, based on the address mode (discussed in module 13).

2. If the address refers to virtual memory, translate from virtual to real memory address.

3. Determine whether the addressed item is in cache.

4. If not, issue a command to the memory module.

Arithmetic

Most machines provide the basic arithmetic operations of add, subtract, multiply, and divide. These are invariably provided for signed integer ( fixed- point) numbers. Often they are also provided for floating- point and packed decimal numbers. Other possible operations include a variety of single- operand instructions; for example,

■ Absolute: Take the absolute value of the operand.

■ Negate: Negate the operand.

■ Increment: Add 1 to the operand.

■ Decrement: Subtract 1 from the operand.

The execution of an arithmetic instruction may involve data transfer operations to position operands for input to the ALU, and to deliver the output of the ALU. In addition, of course, the ALU portion of the processor performs the desired operation.

Logical

Most machines also provide a variety of operations for manipulating individual bits of a word or other addressable units, often referred to as “bit twiddling.” They are based upon Boolean operations. Some of the basic logical operations that can be performed on Boolean or binary data are shown in the table below. The NOT operation inverts a bit. AND, OR, and Exclusive- OR (XOR) are the most common logical functions with two operands. EQUAL is a useful binary test.

These logical operations can be applied bitwise to n- bit logical data units. Thus, if two registers contain the data:

(R1) = 10100101

(R2) = 00001111

then

(R1) AND (R2) = 00000101

where the notation (X) means the contents of location X. Thus, the AND operation can be used as a mask that selects certain bits in a word and zeros out the remaining bits. As another example, if two registers contain

(R1) = 10100101

(R2) = 11111111

then

(R1) XOR (R2) = 01011010

With one word set to all 1s, the XOR operation inverts all of the bits in the other word (ones complement).  In addition to bitwise logical operations, most machines provide a variety of shifting and rotating functions. The most basic operations are illustrated in the next figure.

With a logical shift, the bits of a word are shifted left or right. On one end, the bit shifted out is lost. On the other end, a 0 is shifted in. Logical shifts are useful primarily for isolating fields within a word. The 0s that are shifted into a word displace unwanted information that is shifted off the other end. As an example, suppose we wish to transmit characters of data to an I/O device 1 character at a time. If each memory word is 16 bits in length and contains two characters, we must unpack the characters before they can be sent. To send the two characters in a word;

1. Load the word into a register.

2. Shift to the right eight times. This shifts the remaining character to the right half of the register.

3. Perform I/O. The I/O module reads the lower- order 8 bits from the data bus.

The preceding steps result in sending the left- hand character. To send the right- hand character;

1. Load the word again into the register.

2. AND with 0000000011111111. This masks out the character on the left.

3. Perform I/O.

The arithmetic shift operation treats the data as a signed integer and does not shift the sign bit. On a right arithmetic shift, the sign bit is replicated into the bit position to its right. On a left arithmetic shift, a logical left shift is performed on all bits but the sign bit, which is retained. These operations can speed up certain arithmetic operations. With numbers in twos complement notation, a right arithmetic shift corresponds to a division by 2, with truncation for odd numbers. Both an arithmetic left shift and a logical left shift correspond to a multiplication by 2 when there is no overflow. If overflow occurs, arithmetic and logical left shift operations produce different results, but the arithmetic left shift retains the sign of the number. Because of the potential for overflow, many processors do not include this instruction, including PowerPC and Itanium. Others, such as the IBM EAS/390, do offer the instruction. Curiously, the x86 architecture includes an arithmetic left shift but defines it to be identical to a logical left shift.

Rotate, or cyclic shift, operations preserve all of the bits being operated on. One use of a rotate is to bring each bit successively into the leftmost bit, where it can be identified by testing the sign of the data (treated as a number). As with arithmetic operations, logical operations involve ALU activity and may involve data transfer operations. Table below gives examples of all of the shift and rotate operations discussed in this subsection.

Conversion

Conversion instructions are those that change the format or operate on the format of data. An example is converting from decimal to binary. An example of a more complex editing instruction is the EAS/390 Translate (TR) instruction. This instruction can be used to convert from one 8-bit code to another, and it takes three operands:

TR R1 (L), R2

The operand R2 contains the address of the start of a table of 8-bit codes. The L bytes starting at the address specified in R1 are translated, each byte being replaced by the contents of a table entry indexed by that byte. For example, to translate from EBCDIC to IRA, we first create a 256-byte table in storage locations, say, 1000-10FF hexadecimal. The table contains the characters of the IRA code in the sequence of the binary representation of the EBCDIC code; that is, the IRA code is placed in the table at the relative location equal to the binary value of the EBCDIC code of the same character. Thus, locations 10F0 through 10F9 will contain the values 30 through 39, because F0 is the EBCDIC code for the digit 0, and 30 is the IRA code for the digit 0, and so on through digit 9. Now suppose we have the EBCDIC for the digits 1984 starting at location 2100 and we wish to translate to IRA. Assume the following:

■ Locations 2100–2103 contain F1 F9 F8 F4.

■ R1 contains 2100.

■ R2 contains 1000.

Then, if we execute

TR R1 (4), R2

locations 2100–2103 will contain 31 39 38 34.

Input/Output

Input/output instructions were discussed in some detail in Chapter 7. As we saw, there are a variety of approaches taken, including isolated programmed I/O, memory-mapped programmed I/O, DMA, and the use of an I/O processor. Many implementations provide only a few I/O instructions, with the specific actions specified by parameters, codes, or command words.

System Control

System control instructions are those that can be executed only while the processor is in a certain privileged state or is executing a program in a special privileged area of memory. Typically, these instructions are reserved for the use of the operating system.

Some examples of system control operations are as follows. A system control instruction may read or alter a control register; we discuss control registers in module 14. Another example is an instruction to read or modify a storage protection key, such as is used in the EAS/390 memory system. Yet another example is access to process control blocks in a multiprogramming system.

Transfer of Control

For all of the operation types discussed so far, the next instruction to be performed is the one that immediately follows, in memory, the current instruction. However, a significant fraction of the instructions in any program have as their function changing the sequence of instruction execution. For these instructions, the operation performed by the processor is to update the program counter to contain the address of some instruction in memory. There are a number of reasons why transfer- of- control operations are required. Among the most important are the following:

1. In the practical use of computers, it is essential to be able to execute each instruction more than once and perhaps many thousands of times. It may require thousands or perhaps millions of instructions to implement an application. This would be unthinkable if each instruction had to be written out separately. If a table or a list of items is to be processed, a program loop is needed. One sequence of instructions is executed repeatedly to process all the data.

2. Virtually all programs involve some decision making. We would like the computer to do one thing if one condition holds, and another thing if another condition holds. For example, a sequence of instructions computes the square root of a number. At the start of the sequence, the sign of the number is tested. If the number is negative, the computation is not performed, but an error condition is reported.

3. To compose correctly a large or even medium- size computer program is an exceedingly difficult task. It helps if there are mechanisms for breaking the task up into smaller pieces that can be worked on one at a time.

We now turn to a discussion of the most common transfer- of- control operations found in instruction sets: branch, skip, and procedure call.

BRANCH INSTRUCTION

A branch instruction, also called a jump instruction, has as one of its operands the address of the next instruction to be executed. Most often, the instruction is a conditional branch instruction. That is, the branch is made (update program counter to equal address specified in operand) only if a certain condition is met. Otherwise, the next instruction in sequence is executed (increment program counter as usual). A branch instruction in which the branch is always taken is an unconditional branch.

There are two common ways of generating the condition to be tested in a conditional branch instruction. First, most machines provide a 1-bit or multiple- bit condition code that is set as the result of some operations. This code can be thought of as a short user- visible register. As an example, an arithmetic operation (ADD, SUBTRACT, and so on) could set a 2-bit condition code with one of the following four values: 0, positive, negative, overflow. On such a machine, there could be four different conditional branch instructions:

BRP X Branch to location X if result is positive.

BRN X Branch to location X if result is negative.

BRZ X Branch to location X if result is zero.

BRO X Branch to location X if overflow occurs.

In all of these cases, the result referred to is the result of the most recent operation that set the condition code. Another approach that can be used with a three- address instruction format is to perform a comparison and specify a branch in the same instruction. For example,

BRE R1, R2, X Branch to X if contents of R1 = contents of R2.

Figure below shows examples of these operations.

Note that a branch can be either forward (an instruction with a higher address) or backward (lower address). The example shows how an unconditional and a conditional branch can be used to create a repeating loop of instructions. The instructions in locations 202 through 210 will be executed repeatedly until the result of subtracting Y from X is 0.

SKIP INSTRUCTIONS

Another form of transfer- of- control instruction is the skip instruction. The skip instruction includes an implied address. Typically, the skip implies that one instruction be skipped; thus, the implied address equals the address of the next instruction plus one instruction length. Because the skip instruction does not require a destination address field, it is free to do other things. A typical example is the increment- and- skip- if- zero (ISZ) instruction. Consider the following program fragment:

301

....

309 ISZ R1

310 BR 301

311

In this fragment, the two transfer- of- control instructions are used to implement an iterative loop. R1 is set with the negative of the number of iterations to be performed. At the end of the loop, R1 is incremented. If it is not 0, the program branches back to the beginning of the loop. Otherwise, the branch is skipped, and the program continues with the next instruction after the end of the loop.

PROCEDURE CALL INSTRUCTIONS

Perhaps the most important innovation in the development of programming languages is the procedure. A procedure is a self- contained computer program that is incorporated into a larger program. At any point in the program the procedure may be invoked, or called. The processor is instructed to go and execute the entire procedure and then return to the point from which the call took place.

The two principal reasons for the use of procedures are economy and modularity. A procedure allows the same piece of code to be used many times. This is important for economy in programming effort and for making the most efficient use of storage space in the system (the program must be stored). Procedures also allow large programming tasks to be subdivided into smaller units. This use of modularity greatly eases the programming task.

The procedure mechanism involves two basic instructions: a call instruction that branches from the present location to the procedure, and a return instruction that returns from the procedure to the place from which it was called. Both of these are forms of branching instructions.

Figure below illustrates the use of procedures to construct a program. In this example, there is a main program starting at location 4000. This program includes a call to procedure PROC1, starting at location 4500. When this call instruction is encountered, the processor suspends execution of the main program and begins execution of PROC1 by fetching the next instruction from location 4500.

Within PROC1, there are two calls to PROC2 at location 4800. In each case, the execution of PROC1 s suspended and PROC2 is executed. The RETURN statement causes the processor to go back to the calling program and continue execution at the instruction after the corresponding CALL instruction. This behavior is illustrated in Figure 12.8b. Three points are worth noting:

1. A procedure can be called from more than one location.

2. A procedure call can appear in a procedure. This allows the nesting of procedures to an arbitrary depth.

3. Each procedure call is matched by a return in the called program.

Because we would like to be able to call a procedure from a variety of points, the processor must somehow save the return address so that the return can take place appropriately. There are three common places for storing the return address:

■ Register

■ Start of called procedure

■ Top of stack

Consider a machine- language instruction CALL X, which stands for call procedure at location X. If the register approach is used, CALL X causes the following actions:

RN ←PC + ∆ PCX

PC ← X

where RN is a register that is always used for this purpose, PC is the program counter, and ∆ is the instruction length. The called procedure can now save the contents of RN to be used for the later return. A second possibility is to store the return address at the start of the procedure. In this case, CALL X causes:

X ← PC + ∆

PC ←X + 1

This is quite handy. The return address has been stored safely away. Both of the preceding approaches work and have been used. The only limitation of these approaches is that they complicate the use of reentrant procedures. A reentrant procedure is one in which it is possible to have several calls open to it at the same time. A recursive procedure (one that calls itself) is an example of the use of this feature. If parameters are passed via registers or memory for a reentrant procedure, some code must be responsible for saving the parameters so that the registers or memory space are available for other procedure calls.

A more general and powerful approach is to use a stack (see Appendix I for a discussion of stacks). When the processor executes a call, it places the return address on the stack. When it executes a return, it uses the address on the stack. Figure below illustrates the use of the stack.

these approaches have drawbacks. If registers are used, the called program and the calling program must be written to assure that the registers are used properly. The storing of parameters in memory makes it difficult to exchange a variable number of parameters. Both approaches prevent the use of reentrant procedures. A more flexible approach to parameter passing is the stack. When the processor executes a call, it not only stacks the return address, it stacks parameters to be passed to the called procedure. The called procedure can access the parameters from the stack. Upon return, return parameters can also be placed on the stack. The entire set of parameters, including return address, that is stored for a procedure invocation is referred to as a stack frame.

An example is provided in Figure above. The example refers to procedure P in which the local variables x1 and x2 are declared, and procedure Q, which P can call and in which the local variables y1 and y2 are declared. In this figure, the return point for each procedure is the first item stored in the corresponding stack frame. Next is stored a pointer to the beginning of the previous frame. This is needed if the number or length of parameters to be stacked is variable.