Introduction

Much of what is discussed in this book is not readily apparent to the user or programmer of a computer. If a programmer is using a high- level language, such as Pascal or Ada, very little of the architecture of the underlying machine is visible. One boundary where the computer designer and the computer programmer can view the same machine is the machine instruction set. From the designer’s point of view, the machine instruction set provides the functional requirements for the processor: implementing the processor is a task that in large part involves implementing the machine instruction set. The user who chooses to program in machine language becomes aware of the register and memory structure, the types of data directly supported by the machine, and the functioning of the ALU. A description of a computer’s machine instruction set goes a long way toward explaining the computer’s processor. Accordingly, we focus on machine instructions in this chapter and the next.

Learning Objectives

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

Present an overview of essential characteristics of machine instructions.

Describe the types of operands used in typical machine instruction sets.

Present an overview of x86 and ARM data types.

Describe the types of operands supported by typical machine instruction sets.

Present an overview of x86 and ARM operation types.

Understand the differences among big endian, little endian, and bi- endian.

Presentation Materials

[10_Instruction Sets characteristics.ppt](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/60702/files/27414228/download?verifier=QgSd5LhdSsTSYKoumOhquZzMvD2C2B7EU4d4AIas&wrap=1)