Machine instructions operate on data. The most important general categories of data are:

■ Addresses

■ Numbers

■ Characters

■ Logical data

We shall see, in discussing addressing modes in Module13, that addresses are, in fact, a form of data. In many cases, some calculation must be performed on the operand reference in an instruction to determine the main or virtual memory address. In this context, addresses can be considered to be unsigned integers. Other common data types are numbers, characters, and logical data, and each of these is briefly examined in this section. Beyond that, some machines define specialized data types or data structures. For example, there may be machine operations that operate directly on a list or a string of characters.

Numbers

All machine languages include numeric data types. Even in nonnumeric data processing, there is a need for numbers to act as counters, field widths, and so forth. An important distinction between numbers used in ordinary mathematics and numbers stored in a computer is that the latter are limited. This is true in two senses. First, there is a limit to the magnitude of numbers representable on a machine and second, in the case of floating- point numbers, a limit to their precision. Thus, the programmer is faced with understanding the consequences of rounding, overflow, and underflow. Three types of numerical data are common in computers:

■ Binary integer or binary fixed point

■ Binary floating point

■ Decimal

We examined the first two in some detail in module 10. It remains to say a few words about decimal numbers. Although all internal computer operations are binary in nature, the human users of the system deal with decimal numbers. Thus, there is a necessity to convert from decimal to binary on input and from binary to decimal on output. For applications in which there is a great deal of I/O and comparatively little, comparatively simple computation, it is preferable to store and operate on the numbers in decimal form. The most common representation for this purpose is packed decimal.

With packed decimal, each decimal digit is represented by a 4-bit code, in the obvious way, with two digits stored per byte. Thus, 0 = 000, 1 = 0001,.. , 8 = 1000, and 9 = 1001. Note that this is a rather inefficient code because only 10 of 16 possible 4-bit values are used. To form numbers, 4-bit codes are strung together, usually in multiples of 8 bits. Thus, the code for 246 is 0000 0010 0100 0110. This code is clearly less compact than a straight binary representation, but it avoids the conversion overhead. Negative numbers can be represented by including a 4-bit sign digit at either the left or right end of a string of packed decimal digits. Standard sign values are 1100 for positive (+) and 1101 for negative (-). Many machines provide arithmetic instructions for performing operations directly on packed decimal numbers. The algorithms are quite similar to those described in module 9 but must take into account the decimal carry operation.

Characters

A common form of data is text or character strings. While textual data are most convenient for human beings, they cannot, in character form, be easily stored or transmitted by data processing and communications systems. Such systems are designed for binary data. Thus, a number of codes have been devised by which characters are represented by a sequence of bits. Perhaps the earliest common example of this is the Morse code. Today, the most commonly used character code in the International Reference Alphabet (IRA), referred to in the United States as the American Standard Code for Information Interchange . Each character in this code is represented by a unique 7-bit pattern; thus, 128 different characters can be represented. This is a larger number than is necessary to represent printable characters, and some of the patterns represent control characters. Some of these control characters have to do with controlling the printing of characters on a page. Others are concerned with communications procedures. IRA- encoded characters are almost always stored and transmitted using 8 bits per character. The eighth bit may be set to 0 or used as a parity bit for error detection. In the latter case, the bit is set such that the total number of binary 1s in each octet is always odd (odd parity) or always even (even parity).

Logical Data

Normally, each word or other addressable unit (byte, halfword, and so on) is treated as a single unit of data. It is sometimes useful, however, to consider an n- bit unit as consisting of n 1-bit items of data, each item having the value 0 or 1. When data are viewed this way, they are considered to be logical data. There are two advantages to the bit- oriented view.

First, we may sometimes wish to store an array of Boolean or binary data items, in which each item can take on only the values 1 (true) and 0 (false). With logical data, memory can be used most efficiently for this storage.

Second, there are occasions when we wish to manipulate the bits of a data item. For example, if floating- point operations are implemented in software, we need to be able to shift significant bits in some operations. Another example: To convert from IRA to packed decimal, we need to extract the rightmost 4 bits of each byte. Note that, in the preceding examples, the same data are treated sometimes as logical and other times as numerical or text. The “type” of a unit of data is determined by the operation being performed on it. While this is not normally the case in high- level languages, it is almost always the case with machine language.