The address field or fields in a typical instruction format are relatively small. We would like to be able to reference a large range of locations in main memory or, for some systems, virtual memory. To achieve this objective, a variety of addressing techniques has been employed. They all involve some trade- off between address range and/or addressing flexibility, on the one hand, and the number of memory references in the instruction and/or the complexity of address calculation, on the other. In this section, we examine the most common addressing techniques, or modes:

■ Immediate

■ Direct

■ Indirect

■ Register

■ Register indirect

■ Displacement

■ Stack

These modes are illustrated in the figure below.

In this section, we use the following notation:

A = contents of an address field in the instruction

R = contents of an address field in the instruction that refers to a register

EA = actual (effective) address of the location containing the referenced operand

(X) = contents of memory location X or register X

Table below indicates the address calculation performed for each addressing mode.

Before beginning this discussion, two comments need to be made. First, virtually all computer architectures provide more than one of these addressing modes. The question arises as to how the processor can determine which address mode is being used in a particular instruction. Several approaches are taken. Often, different opcodes will use different addressing modes. Also, one or more bits in the instruction format can be used as a mode field. The value of the mode field determines which addressing mode is to be used.

The second comment concerns the interpretation of the effective address (EA). In a system without virtual memory, the effective address will be either a main memory address or a register. In a virtual memory system, the effective address is a virtual address or a register. The actual mapping to a physical address is a function of the memory management unit (MMU) and is invisible to the programmer.

Immediate Addressing

The simplest form of addressing is immediate addressing, in which the operand value is present in the instruction

Operand = A

This mode can be used to define and use constants or set initial values of variables. Typically, the number will be stored in twos complement form; the leftmost bit of the operand field is used as a sign bit. When the operand is loaded into a data register, the sign bit is extended to the left to the full data word size. In some cases, the immediate binary value is interpreted as an unsigned nonnegative integer.

The advantage of immediate addressing is that no memory reference other than the instruction fetch is required to obtain the operand, thus saving one memory or cache cycle in the instruction cycle. The disadvantage is that the size of the number is restricted to the size of the address field, which, in most instruction sets, is small compared with the word length.

Direct Addressing

With direct addressing, the length of the address field is usually less than the word length, thus limiting the address range. One solution is to have the address field refer to the address of a word in memory, which in turn contains a full- length address of the operand. This is known as indirect addressing:

EA = (A)

s defined earlier, the parentheses are to be interpreted as meaning contents of. The obvious advantage of this approach is that for a word length of N, an address space of 2N is now available. The disadvantage is that instruction execution requires two memory references to fetch the operand: one to get its address and a second to get its value.

Although the number of words that can be addressed is now equal to 2N, the number of different effective addresses that may be referenced at any one time is limited to 2K, where K is the length of the address field. Typically, this is not a burdensome restriction, and it can be an asset. In a virtual memory environment, all the effective address locations can be confined to page 0 of any process. Because the address field of an instruction is small, it will naturally produce low- numbered direct addresses, which would appear in page 0. (The only restriction is that the page size must be greater than or equal to 2K.) When a process is active, there will be repeated references to page 0, causing it to remain in real memory. Thus, an indirect memory reference will involve, at most, one page fault rather than two.

A rarely used variant of indirect addressing is multilevel or cascaded indirect addressing:

EA = (...(A)...)

In this case, one bit of a full- word address is an indirect flag (I). If the I bit is 0, then the word contains the EA. If the I bit is 1, then another level of indirection is invoked. There does not appear to be any particular advantage to this approach, and its disadvantage is that three or more memory references could be required to fetch an operand.'

Register Addressing

Register addressing is similar to direct addressing. The only difference is that the address field refers to a register rather than a main memory address:

EA = R

To clarify, if the contents of a register address field in an instruction is 5, then register R5 is the intended address, and the operand value is contained in R5. Typically, an address field that references registers will have from 3 to 5 bits, so that a total of from 8 to 32 general- purpose registers can be referenced.

The advantages of register addressing are that (1) only a small address field is needed in the instruction, and (2) no time- consuming memory references are required. As was discussed in module 4, the memory access time for a register internal to the processor is much less than that for a main memory address. The disadvantage of register addressing is that the address space is very limited.

If register addressing is heavily used in an instruction set, this implies that the processor registers will be heavily used. Because of the severely limited number of registers (compared with main memory locations), their use in this fashion makes sense only if they are employed efficiently. If every operand is brought into a register from main memory, operated on once, and then returned to main memory, then a wasteful intermediate step has been added. If, instead, the operand in a register remains in use for multiple operations, then a real savings is achieved. An example is the intermediate result in a calculation. In particular, suppose that the algorithm for twos complement multiplication were to be implemented in software. The location labeled A in the flowchart is referenced many times and should be implemented in a register rather than a main memory location.

It is up to the programmer or compiler to decide which values should remain in registers and which should be stored in main memory. Most modern processors employ multiple general- purpose registers, placing a burden for efficient execution on the assembly- language programmer (e.g., compiler writer).

Register Indirect Addressing

Just as register addressing is analogous to direct addressing, register indirect addressing is analogous to indirect addressing. In both cases, the only difference is whether the address field refers to a memory location or a register. Thus, for register indirect address,

EA = (R)

The advantages and limitations of register indirect addressing are basically the same as for indirect addressing. In both cases, the address space limitation (limited range of addresses) of the address field is overcome by having that field refer to a word- length location containing an address. In addition, register indirect addressing uses one less memory reference than indirect addressing.

Displacement Addressing

A very powerful mode of addressing combines the capabilities of direct addressing and register indirect addressing. It is known by a variety of names depending on the context of its use, but the basic mechanism is the same. We will refer to this as displacement addressing:

EA = A + (R)

Displacement addressing requires that the instruction have two address fields, at least one of which is explicit. The value contained in one address field (value = A) is used directly. The other address field, or an implicit reference based on opcode, refers to a register whose contents are added to A to produce the effective address. We will describe three of the most common uses of displacement addressing:

■ Relative addressing

■ Base- register addressing

■ Indexing

RELATIVE ADDRESSING

For relative addressing, also called PC- relative addressing, the implicitly referenced register is the program counter (PC). That is, the next instruction address is added to the address field to produce the EA. Typically, the address field is treated as a twos complement number for this operation. Thus, the effective address is a displacement relative to the address of the instruction.

Relative addressing exploits the concept of locality that was discussed in modules 4 and 8. If most memory references are relatively near to the instruction being executed, then the use of relative addressing saves address bits in the instruction.

BASE REGISTER ADDRESSING

For base- register addressing, the interpretation is the following: The referenced register contains a main memory address, and the address field contains a displacement (usually an unsigned integer representation) from that address. The register reference may be explicit or implicit.
Base- register addressing also exploits the locality of memory references. It is a convenient means of implementing segmentation, which was discussed in module 8. In some implementations, a single segment- base register is employed and is used implicitly. In others, the programmer may choose a register to hold the base address of a segment, and the instruction must reference it explicitly. In this latter case, if the length of the address field is K and the number of possible registers is N, then one instruction can reference any one of N areas of 2K words.

INDEXING

For indexing, the interpretation is typically the following: The address field references a main memory address, and the referenced register contains a positive displacement from that address. Note that this usage is just the opposite of the interpretation for base- register addressing. Of course, it is more than just a matter of user interpretation. Because the address field is considered to be a memory address in indexing, it generally contains more bits than an address field in a comparable base- register instruction. Also, we will see that there are some refinements to indexing that would not be as useful in the base- register context. Nevertheless, the method of calculating the EA is the same for both base- register addressing and indexing, and in both cases the register reference is sometimes explicit and sometimes implicit (for different processor types).

An important use of indexing is to provide an efficient mechanism for performing iterative operations. Consider, for example, a list of numbers stored starting at location A. Suppose that we would like to add 1 to each element on the list. We need to fetch each value, add 1 to it, and store it back. The sequence of effective addresses that we need is A, A + 1, A + 2, . . . , up to the last location on the list. With indexing, this is easily done. The value A is stored in the instruction’s address field, and the chosen register, called an index register, is initialized to 0. After each operation, the index register is incremented by 1.

Because index registers are commonly used for such iterative tasks, it is typical that there is a need to increment or decrement the index register after each reference to it. Because this is such a common operation, some systems will automatically do this as part of the same instruction cycle. This is known as autoindexing. If certain registers are devoted exclusively to indexing, then autoindexing can be invoked implicitly and automatically. If general- purpose registers are used, the autoindex operation may need to be signaled by a bit in the instruction. Autoindexing using increment can be depicted as follows.

EA = A + (R)

(R)←(R) + 1

In some machines, both indirect addressing and indexing are provided, and it is possible to employ both in the same instruction. There are two possibilities: the indexing is performed either before or after the indirection. If indexing is performed after the indirection, it is termed postindexing:

EA = (A) + (R)

First, the contents of the address field are used to access a memory location containing a direct address. This address is then indexed by the register value. This technique is useful for accessing one of a number of blocks of data of a fixed format. For example, it was described in module  8 that the operating system needs to employ a process control block for each process. The operations performed are the same regardless of which block is being manipulated. Thus, the addresses in the instructions that reference the block could point to a location (value = A) containing a variable pointer to the start of a process control block. The index register contains the displacement within the block.

With preindexing, the indexing is performed before the indirection:

EA = (A + (R))

An address is calculated as with simple indexing. In this case, however, the calculated address contains not the operand, but the address of the operand. An example of the use of this technique is to construct a multiway branch table. At a particular point in a program, there may be a branch to one of a number of locations depending on conditions. A table of addresses can be set up starting at location A. By indexing into this table, the required location can be found. Typically, an instruction set will not include both preindexing and postindexing.

Stack Addressing

The final addressing mode that we consider is stack addressing. As defined in Appendix I, a stack is a linear array of locations. It is sometimes referred to as a pushdown list or last- in- first- out queue. The stack is a reserved block of locations. Items are appended to the top of the stack so that, at any given time, the block is partially filled. Associated with the stack is a pointer whose value is the address of the top of the stack. Alternatively, the top two elements of the stack may be in processor registers, in which case the stack pointer references the third element of the stack. The stack pointer is maintained in a register. Thus, references to stack locations in memory are in fact register indirect addresses. The stack mode of addressing is a form of implied addressing. The machine instructions need not include a memory reference but implicitly operate on the top of the stack.