x86 Instruction Formats

The x86 is equipped with a variety of instruction formats. Of the elements described in this subsection, only the opcode field is always present. Figure below illustrates the general instruction format. Instructions are made up of from zero to four optional instruction prefixes, a 1- or 2-byte opcode, an optional address specifier (which consists of the ModR/M byte and the Scale Index Base byte) an optional displacement, and an optional immediate field.

Let us first consider the prefix bytes:

■ Instruction prefixes: The instruction prefix, if present, consists of the LOCK prefix or one of the repeat prefixes. The LOCK prefix is used to ensure exclusive use of shared memory in multiprocessor environments. The repeat prefixes specify repeated operation of a string, which enables the x86 to process strings much faster than with a regular software loop. There are five different repeat prefixes: REP, REPE, REPZ, REPNE, and REPNZ. When the absolute REP prefix is present, the operation specified in the instruction is executed repeatedly on successive elements of the string; the number of repetitions is specified in register CX. The conditional REP prefix causes the instruction to repeat until the count in CX goes to zero or until the condition is met.

■ Segment override: Explicitly specifies which segment register an instruction should use, overriding the default segment- register selection generated by the x86 for that instruction.

■ Operand size: An instruction has a default operand size of 16 or 32 bits, and the operand prefix switches between 32-bit and 16-bit operands.

■ Address size: The processor can address memory using either 16- or 32-bit addresses. The address size determines the displacement size in instructions and the size of address offsets generated during effective address calculation. One of these sizes is designated as default, and the address size prefix switches between 32-bit and 16-bit address generation.

The instruction itself includes the following fields:

■ Opcode: The opcode field is 1, 2, or 3 bytes in length. The opcode may also include bits that specify if data is byte- or full- size (16 or 32 bits depending on context), direction of data operation (to or from memory), and whether an immediate data field must be sign extended.

■ ModR/M: This byte, and the next, provide addressing information. The ModR/M byte specifies whether an operand is in a register or in memory; if it is in memory, then fields within the byte specify the addressing mode to be used. The ModR/M byte consists of three fields: The Mod field (2 bits) combines with the R/M field to form 32 possible values: 8 registers and 24 indexing modes; the Reg/Opcode field (3 bits) specifies either a register number or three more bits of opcode information; the R/M field (3 bits) can specify a register as the location of an operand, or it can form part of the addressing- mode encoding in combination with the Mod field.

■ SIB: Certain encoding of the ModR/M byte specifies the inclusion of the SIB byte to specify fully the addressing mode. The SIB byte consists of three fields: The Scale field (2 bits) specifies the scale factor for scaled indexing; the Index field (3 bits) specifies the index register; the Base field (3 bits) specifies the base register.

■ Displacement: When the addressing- mode specifier indicates that a displacement is used, an 8-, 16-, or 32-bit signed integer displacement field is added.

■ Immediate: Provides the value of an 8-, 16-, or 32-bit operand.

Several comparisons may be useful here. In the x86 format, the addressing mode is provided as part of the opcode sequence rather than with each operand. Because only one operand can have address- mode information, only one memory operand can be referenced in an instruction. In contrast, the VAX carries the address- mode information with each operand, allowing memory- to- memory operations. The x86 instructions are therefore more compact. However, if a memory- to- memory operation is required, the VAX can accomplish this in a single instruction.

The x86 format allows the use of not only 1-byte, but also 2-byte and 4-byte offsets for indexing. Although the use of the larger index offsets results in longer instructions, this feature provides needed flexibility. For example, it is useful in addressing large arrays or large stack frames. In contrast, the IBM S/370 instruction format allows offsets no greater than 4 Kbytes (12 bits of offset information), and the offset must be positive. When a location is not in reach of this offset, the compiler must generate extra code to generate the needed address. This problem is especially apparent in dealing with stack frames that have local variables occupying in excess of 4 Kbytes. As puts it, “generating code for the 370 is so painful as a result of that restriction that there have even been compilers for the 370 that simply chose to limit the size of the stack frame to 4 Kbytes.”

As can be seen, the encoding of the x86 instruction set is very complex. This has to do partly with the need to be backward compatible with the 8086 machine and partly with a desire on the part of the designers to provide every possible assistance to the compiler writer in producing efficient code. It is a matter of some debate whether an instruction set as complex as this is preferable to the opposite extreme of the RISC instruction sets.

ARM Instruction Formats

All instructions in the ARM architecture are 32 bits long and follow a regular format (Figure below).

The first four bits of an instruction are the condition code. As discussed in module 12, virtually all ARM instructions can be conditionally executed. The next three bits specify the general type of instruction. For most instructions other than branch instructions, the next five bits constitute an opcode and/or modifier bits for the operation. The remaining 20 bits are for operand addressing. The regular structure of the instruction formats eases the job of the instruction decode units.

immediate Constants

To achieve a greater range of immediate values, the data processing immediate format specifies both an immediate value and a rotate value. The 8-bit immediate value is expanded to 32 bits and then rotated right by a number of bits equal to twice the 4-bit rotate value. Several examples are shown in the figure below.

THUMB INSTRUCTION SET

The Thumb instruction set is a re- encoded subset of the ARM instruction set. Thumb is designed to increase the performance of ARM implementations that use a 16-bit or narrower memory data bus and to allow better code density than provided by the ARM instruction for both 16-bit and 32-bit processors. The Thumb instruction set was created by analyzing the 32-bit ARM instruction set and deriving the best fit 16-bit instruction set, thus reducing code size. The savings is achieved in the following way:

1. Thumb instructions are unconditional, so the condition code field is not used. Also, all Thumb arithmetic and logic instructions update the condition flags, so that the update- flag bit is not needed. Savings: 5 bits.

2. Thumb has only a subset of the operations in the full instruction set and uses only a 2-bit opcode field, plus a 3-bit type field. Savings: 2 bits.

3. The remaining savings of 9 bits comes from reductions in the operand specifications. For example, Thumb instructions reference only registers r0 through r7, so only 3 bits are required for register references, rather than 4 bits. Immediate values do not include a 4-bit rotate field.

The ARM processor can execute a program consisting of a mixture of Thumb instructions and 32-bit ARM instructions. A bit in the processor control register determines which type of instruction is currently being executed. Figure below shows an example. The figure shows both the general format and a specific instance of an instruction in both 16-bit and 32-bit formats.

THUMB-2 INSTRUCTION SET

With the introduction of the Thumb instruction set, the user was required to blend instruction sets by compiling performance critical code to ARM and the rest to Thumb. This manual code blending requires additional effort and it is difficult to achieve optimal results. To overcome these problems, ARM developed the Thumb- 2 instruction set, which is the only instruction set available on the Cortex- M microcontroller products.

Thumb- 2 is a major enhancement to the Thumb instruction set architecture (ISA). It introduces 32-bit instructions that can be intermixed freely with the older 16-bit Thumb instructions. These new 32-bit instructions cover almost all the functionality of the ARM instruction set. The most important difference between the Thumb ISA and the ARM ISA is that most 32-bit Thumb instructions are unconditional, whereas almost all ARM instructions can be conditional. However, Thumb- 2 introduces a new
If- Then (IT) instruction that delivers much of the functionality of the condition field in ARM instructions. Thumb- 2 delivers overall code density comparable with Thumb, together with the performance levels associated with the ARM ISA. Before Thumb- 2, developers had to choose between Thumb for size and ARM for performance.

Studies reportson an analysis of the Thumb- 2 instruction set compared with the ARM and original Thumb instruction sets. The analysis involved compiling and executing the Embedded Microprocessor Benchmark Consortium (EEMBC) benchmark suite using the three instruction sets, with the following results:

■ With compilers optimized for performance, Thumb- 2 size was 26% smaller than ARM, and slightly larger than original Thumb.

■ With compilers optimized for space, Thumb- 2 size was 32% smaller than ARM, and slightly smaller than original Thumb.

■ With compilers optimized for performance, Thumb- 2 performance on the benchmark suite was 98% of ARM performance and 125% of original Thumb performance.

These results confirm that Thumb- 2 meets its design objectives. Figure below shows how the new 32-bit Thumb instructions are encoded. The encoding is compatible with the existing Thumb unconditional branch instructions, which has the bit pattern 11100 in the five leftmost bits of the instruction. No other 16-bit instruction begins with the pattern 111 in the three leftmost bits, so the bit patterns 11101, 11110, and 11111 indicate that this is a 32-bit Thumb instruction.