Inheritance in Python

Inheritance is a powerful feature in object oriented programming.

It refers to defining a new class with little or no modification to an existing class. The new class is called derived (or child) class and the one from which it inherits is called the base (or parent) class.
Python Inheritance Syntaxclass BaseClass:
Body of base class
class DerivedClass(BaseClass):
Body of derived class
Derived class inherits features from the base class where new features can be added to it. This results in re-usability of code.
Example of Inheritance in Python
To demonstrate the use of inheritance, let us take an example.

A polygon is a closed figure with 3 or more sides. Say, we have a class called Polygon defined as follows.
classPolygon:def__init__(self, no_of_sides):
self.n = no_of_sides
self.sides = [0for i in range(no_of_sides)]

definputSides(self):
self.sides = [float(input("Enter side "+str(i+1)+" : ")) for i in range(self.n)]

defdispSides(self):for i in range(self.n):
print("Side",i+1,"is",self.sides[i])
This class has data attributes to store the number of sides n and magnitude of each side as a list called sides.

TheinputSides()method takes in the magnitude of each side anddispSides()displays these side lengths.

A triangle is a polygon with 3 sides. So, we can create a class called Triangle which inherits from Polygon. This makes all the attributes of Polygon class available to the Triangle class.

We don't need to define them again (code reusability). Triangle can be defined as follows.
classTriangle(Polygon):def__init__(self):
Polygon.__init__(self,3)

deffindArea(self):
a, b, c = self.sides
# calculate the semi-perimeter
s = (a + b + c) / 2
area = (s*(s-a)*(s-b)*(s-c)) ** 0.5print('The area of the triangle is %0.2f' %area)
However, class Triangle has a new method findArea() to find and print the area of the triangle. Here is a sample run.
>>> t = Triangle()

>>> t.inputSides()
Enter side 1 : 3
Enter side 2 : 5
Enter side 3 : 4>>> t.dispSides()
Side 1is3.0
Side 2is5.0
Side 3is4.0>>> t.findArea()
The area of the triangle is6.00
We can see that even though we did not define methods like inputSides() or dispSides() for class Triangle separately, we were able to use them.

If an attribute is not found in the class itself, the search continues to the base class. This repeats recursively, if the base class is itself derived from other classes.
Method Overriding in Python
In the above example, notice that __init__() method was defined in both classes, Triangle as well Polygon. When this happens, the method in the derived class overrides that in the base class. This is to say, __init__() in Triangle gets preference over the __init__ in Polygon.

Generally when overriding a base method, we tend to extend the definition rather than simply replace it. The same is being done by calling the method in base class from the one in derived class (calling Polygon.__init__() from __init__() in Triangle).

A better option would be to use the built-in function super(). So, super().__init__(3) is equivalent to Polygon.__init__(self,3) and is preferred.

Two built-in functions isinstance() and issubclass() are used to check inheritances.

The function isinstance() returns True if the object is an instance of the class or other classes derived from it. Each and every class in Python inherits from the base class object.
>>> isinstance(t,Triangle)
True>>> isinstance(t,Polygon)
True>>> isinstance(t,int)
False>>> isinstance(t,object)
True
Similarly, issubclass() is used to check for class inheritance.
>>> issubclass(Polygon,Triangle)
False>>> issubclass(Triangle,Polygon)
True>>> issubclass(bool,int)
True

Python Multiple Inheritance
A class can be derived from more than one base class in Python, similar to C++. This is called multiple inheritance.

In multiple inheritance, the features of all the base classes are inherited into the derived class. The syntax for multiple inheritance is similar to single inheritance.
ExampleclassBase1:passclassBase2:passclassMultiDerived(Base1, Base2):pass
Here, the MultiDerived class is derived from Base1 and Base2 classes.

The MultiDerived class inherits from both Base1 and Base2 classes.
Python Multilevel Inheritance
We can also inherit from a derived class. This is called multilevel inheritance. It can be of any depth in Python.

In multilevel inheritance, features of the base class and the derived class are inherited into the new derived class.

An example with corresponding visualization is given below.
classBase:passclassDerived1(Base):passclassDerived2(Derived1):pass
Here, the Derived1 class is derived from the Base class, and the Derived2 class is derived from the Derived1 class.

Method Resolution Order in Python
Every class in Python is derived from theobjectclass. It is the most base type in Python.

So technically, all other classes, either built-in or user-defined, are derived classes and all objects are instances of the object class.
# Output: Trueprint(issubclass(list,object))

# Output: Trueprint(isinstance(5.5,object))

# Output: Trueprint(isinstance("Hello",object))
In the multiple inheritance scenario, any specified attribute is searched first in the current class. If not found, the search continues into parent classes in depth-first, left-right fashion without searching the same class twice.

So, in the above example of MultiDerived class the search order is [MultiDerived, Base1, Base2, object]. This order is also called linearization of MultiDerived class and the set of rules used to find this order is called Method Resolution Order (MRO).

MRO must prevent local precedence ordering and also provide monotonicity. It ensures that a class always appears before its parents. In case of multiple parents, the order is the same as tuples of base classes.

MRO of a class can be viewed as the __mro__ attribute or the mro() method. The former returns a tuple while the latter returns a list.
>>> MultiDerived.__mro__
(<class '__main__.MultiDerived'>,
<class '__main__.Base1'>,
<class '__main__.Base2'>,
<class 'object'>)

>>> MultiDerived.mro()
[<class '__main__.MultiDerived'>,
<class '__main__.Base1'>,
<class '__main__.Base2'>,
<class 'object'>]
Here is a little more complex multiple inheritance example and its visualization along with the MRO.

# Demonstration of MROclassX:passclassY:passclassZ:passclassA(X, Y):passclassB(Y, Z):passclassM(B, A, Z):pass# Output:# [<class '__main__.M'>, <class '__main__.B'>,#  <class '__main__.A'>, <class '__main__.X'>,#  <class '__main__.Y'>, <class '__main__.Z'>,#  <class 'object'>]print(M.mro())
Output:
[<class '__main__.M'>, <class '__main__.B'>, <class '__main__.A'>, <class '__main__.X'>, <class '__main__.Y'>, <class '__main__.Z'>, <class 'object'>]

Python Operator Overloading
Python operators work for built-in classes. But the same operator behaves differently with different types. For example, the + operator will perform arithmetic addition on two numbers, merge two lists, or concatenate two strings.

This feature in Python that allows the same operator to have different meaning according to the context is called operator overloading.

So what happens when we use them with objects of a user-defined class? Let us consider the following class, which tries to simulate a point in 2-D coordinate system.
classPoint:def__init__(self, x=0, y=0):
self.x = x
self.y = y

p1 = Point(1, 2)
p2 = Point(2, 3)
print(p1+p2)
Output
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<string>", line 9, in <module>
print(p1+p2)
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +: 'Point' and 'Point'
Here, we can see that a TypeError was raised, since Python didn't know how to add two Point objects together.

However, we can achieve this task in Python through operator overloading. But first, let's get a notion about special functions.
Python Special Functions
Class functions that begin with double underscore __ are called special functions in Python.

These functions are not the typical functions that we define for a class. The __init__() function we defined above is one of them. It gets called every time we create a new object of that class.

There are numerous other special functions in Python.

Using special functions, we can make our class compatible with built-in functions.
>>> p1 = Point(2,3)
>>> print(p1)
<__main__.Point object at 0x00000000031F8CC0>
Suppose we want the print() function to print the coordinates of the Point object instead of what we got. We can define a __str__() method in our class that controls how the object gets printed. Let's look at how we can achieve this:
classPoint:def__init__(self, x = 0, y = 0):
self.x = x
self.y = y

def__str__(self):return"({0},{1})".format(self.x,self.y)
Now let's try theprint()function again.
classPoint:def__init__(self, x=0, y=0):
self.x = x
self.y = y

def__str__(self):return"({0}, {1})".format(self.x, self.y)

p1 = Point(2, 3)
print(p1)
Output
(2, 3)
That's better. Turns out, that this same method is invoked when we use the built-in function str() or format().
>>> str(p1)
'(2,3)'>>> format(p1)
'(2,3)'
So, when you use str(p1) or format(p1), Python internally calls the p1.__str__() method. Hence the name, special functions.

Now let's go back to operator overloading.
Overloading the + Operator
To overload the + operator, we will need to implement __add__() function in the class. With great power comes great responsibility. We can do whatever we like, inside this function. But it is more sensible to return a Point object of the coordinate sum.
classPoint:def__init__(self, x=0, y=0):
self.x = x
self.y = y

def__str__(self):return"({0},{1})".format(self.x, self.y)

def__add__(self, other):
x = self.x + other.x
y = self.y + other.y
return Point(x, y)
Now let's try the addition operation again:
classPoint:def__init__(self, x=0, y=0):
self.x = x
self.y = y

def__str__(self):return"({0},{1})".format(self.x, self.y)

def__add__(self, other):
x = self.x + other.x
y = self.y + other.y
return Point(x, y)

p1 = Point(1, 2)
p2 = Point(2, 3)

print(p1+p2)
Output
(3,5)
What actually happens is that, when you use p1 + p2, Python calls p1.__add__(p2) which in turn is Point.__add__(p1,p2). After this, the addition operation is carried out the way we specified.

Similarly, we can overload other operators as well. The special function that we need to implement is tabulated below.

OperatorExpressionInternallyAdditionp1 + p2p1.__add__(p2)Subtractionp1 - p2p1.__sub__(p2)Multiplicationp1 * p2p1.__mul__(p2)Powerp1 ** p2p1.__pow__(p2)Divisionp1 / p2p1.__truediv__(p2)Floor Divisionp1 // p2p1.__floordiv__(p2)Remainder (modulo)p1 % p2p1.__mod__(p2)Bitwise Left Shiftp1 << p2p1.__lshift__(p2)Bitwise Right Shiftp1 >> p2p1.__rshift__(p2)Bitwise ANDp1 & p2p1.__and__(p2)Bitwise ORp1 | p2p1.__or__(p2)Bitwise XORp1 ^ p2p1.__xor__(p2)Bitwise NOT~p1p1.__invert__()
Overloading Comparison Operators
Python does not limit operator overloading to arithmetic operators only. We can overload comparison operators as well.

Suppose we wanted to implement the less than symbol < symbol in our Point class.

Let us compare the magnitude of these points from the origin and return the result for this purpose. It can be implemented as follows.
# overloading the less than operatorclassPoint:def__init__(self, x=0, y=0):
self.x = x
self.y = y

def__str__(self):return"({0},{1})".format(self.x, self.y)

def__lt__(self, other):
self_mag = (self.x ** 2) + (self.y ** 2)
other_mag = (other.x ** 2) + (other.y ** 2)
return self_mag < other_mag

p1 = Point(1,1)
p2 = Point(-2,-3)
p3 = Point(1,-1)

# use less thanprint(p1<p2)
print(p2<p3)
print(p1<p3)
Output
True
False
False
Similarly, the special functions that we need to implement, to overload other comparison operators are tabulated below.

OperatorExpressionInternallyLess thanp1 < p2p1.__lt__(p2)Less than or equal top1 <= p2p1.__le__(p2)Equal top1 == p2p1.__eq__(p2)Not equal top1 != p2p1.__ne__(p2)Greater thanp1 > p2p1.__gt__(p2)Greater than or equal top1 >= p2p1.__ge__(p2)

Inheritance
Inheritance is a way of creating a new class for using details of an existing class without modifying it. The newly formed class is a derived class (or child class). Similarly, the existing class is a base class (or parent class).
Use of Inheritance in Python# parent classclassBird:def__init__(self):print("Bird is ready")

defwhoisThis(self):print("Bird")

defswim(self):print("Swim faster")

# child classclassPenguin(Bird):def__init__(self):# call super() function
super().__init__()
print("Penguin is ready")

defwhoisThis(self):print("Penguin")

defrun(self):print("Run faster")

peggy = Penguin()
peggy.whoisThis()
peggy.swim()
peggy.run()
Output
Bird is ready
Penguin is ready
Penguin
Swim faster
Run faster

In the above program, we created two classes i.e. Bird (parent class) and Penguin (child class). The child class inherits the functions of parent class. We can see this from the swim() method.

Again, the child class modified the behavior of the parent class. We can see this from the whoisThis() method. Furthermore, we extend the functions of the parent class, by creating a new run() method.

Additionally, we use the super() function inside the __init__() method. This allows us to run the __init__() method of the parent class inside the child class.
Encapsulation
Using OOP in Python, we can restrict access to methods and variables. This prevents data from direct modification which is called encapsulation. In Python, we denote private attributes using underscore as the prefix i.e single _ or double __.
Data Encapsulation in PythonclassComputer:def__init__(self):
self.__maxprice = 900defsell(self):print("Selling Price: {}".format(self.__maxprice))

defsetMaxPrice(self, price):
self.__maxprice = price

c = Computer()
c.sell()

# change the price
c.__maxprice = 1000
c.sell()

# using setter function
c.setMaxPrice(1000)
c.sell()
Output
Selling Price: 900
Selling Price: 900
Selling Price: 1000
In the above program, we defined a Computer class.

We used __init__() method to store the maximum selling price of Computer. We tried to modify the price. However, we can't change it because Python treats the __maxprice as private attributes.

As shown, to change the value, we have to use a setter function i.e setMaxPrice() which takes price as a parameter.
Polymorphism
Polymorphism is an ability (in OOP) to use a common interface for multiple forms (data types).

Suppose, we need to color a shape, there are multiple shape options (rectangle, square, circle). However we could use the same method to color any shape. This concept is called Polymorphism.
Using Polymorphism in PythonclassParrot:deffly(self):print("Parrot can fly")

defswim(self):print("Parrot can't swim")

classPenguin:deffly(self):print("Penguin can't fly")

defswim(self):print("Penguin can swim")

# common interfacedefflying_test(bird):
bird.fly()

#instantiate objects
blu = Parrot()
peggy = Penguin()

# passing the object
flying_test(blu)
flying_test(peggy)
Output
Parrot can fly
Penguin can't fly
In the above program, we defined two classes Parrot and Penguin. Each of them have a common fly() method. However, their functions are different.

To use polymorphism, we created a common interface i.e flying_test() function that takes any object and calls the object's fly() method. Thus, when we passed the blu and peggy objects in the flying_test() function, it ran effectively.
Key Points to Remember:
Object-Oriented Programming makes the program easy to understand as well as efficient.

Since the class is sharable, the code can be reused.

Data is safe and secure with data abstraction.

Polymorphism allows the same interface for different objects, so programmers can write efficient code.