The term connectivity is used to describe the relationship classification.

Cardinality expresses the minimum and maximum number of entity occurrences associated with one occurrence of the related entity. In the ERD, cardinality is indicated by placing the appropriate numbers beside the entities, using the format (x,y). The first value represents the minimum number of associated entities, while the second value represents the maximum number of associated entities.

When the specific cardinalities are not included on the diagram in Crow’s Foot notation, cardinality is implied by the use of the symbols shown in Figure 7, which describe the connectivity and participation (discussed next).

Figure 7. Connectivity and Cardinality in an ERD

As you examine the Crow’s Foot diagram in Figure 4.7, keep in mind that the cardinalities represent the number of occurrences in the related entity. For example, the cardinality (1,4) next to the CLASS entity in the “PROFESSOR teaches CLASS” relationship indicates that each professor teaches up to four classes, which means that the PROFESSOR table’s primary key value occurs at least once and no more than four times as foreign key values in the CLASS table. If the cardinality had been written as (1,N), there would be no upper limit to the number of classes a professor might teach. Similarly, the cardinality (1,1) next to the PROFESSOR entity indicates that each class is taught by one and only one professor. That is, each CLASS entity occurrence is associated with one and only one entity occurrence in PROFESSOR.