The ER model uses the associative entity to represent an M:N relationship between two or more entities. This associative entity, also called a composite or bridge entity, is in a 1:M relationship with the parent entities and is composed of the primary key attributes of each parent entity. Furthermore, the associative entity can have additional attributes of its own, as shown by the ENROLL associative entity in Figure 23. When using the Crow’s Foot notation, the associative entity is identified as a strong (identifying) relationship, as indicated by the solid relationship lines between the parents and the associative entity.

Figure 23. Converting the M:N Relationship into Two 1:M Relationships

Note that the composite ENROLL entity in Figure 4.23 is existence-dependent on the other two entities; the composition of the ENROLL entity is based on the primary keys of the entities that are connected by the composite entity. The composite entity may also contain additional attributes that play no role in the connective process. For example, although the entity must be composed of at least the STUDENT and CLASS primary keys, it may also include such additional attributes as grades, absences, and other data uniquely identified by the student’s performance in a specific class.

Finally, keep in mind that the ENROLL table’s key (CLASS_CODE and STU_NUM) is composed entirely of the primary keys of the CLASS and STUDENT tables. Therefore, no null entries are possible in the ENROLL table’s key attributes.