A relationship degree indicates the number of entities or participants associated with a relationship. A unary relationship exists when an association is maintained within a single entity. A binary relationship exists when two entities are associated. A ternaryrelationship exists when three entities are associated. Although higher degrees exist, they are rare and are not specifically named. (For example, an association of four entities is described simply as a four-degree relationship.) Figure 15 shows these types of relationship degrees.

Figure 15. Three Types of Relationship Degree

Unary Relationships In the case of the unary relationship shown in Figure 15, an employee within the EMPLOYEE entity is the manager for one or more employees within that entity. In this case, the existence of the “manages” relationship means that EMPLOYEE requires another EMPLOYEE to be the manager—that is, EMPLOYEE has a relationship with itself. Such a relationship is known as a recursive relationship.

Binary Relationships A binary relationship exists when two entities are associated in a relationship. Binary relationships are the most common type of relationship. In fact, to simplify the conceptual design, higher-order (ternary and higher) relationships are decomposed into appropriate equivalent binary relationships whenever possible. In Figure 15, “a PROFESSOR teaches one or more CLASSes” represents a binary relationship.

Ternary and Higher-Order Relationships Although most relationships are binary, the use of ternary and higher-order relationships does allow the designer some latitude regarding the semantics of a problem. A ternary relationship implies an association among three different entities. For example, in Figure 4.16, note the relationships and their consequences, which are represented by the following business rules:

A DOCTOR writes one or more PRESCRIPTIONs.

A PATIENT may receive one or more PRESCRIPTIONs.

A DRUG may appear in one or more PRESCRIPTIONs. (To simplify this example, assume that the business rule states that each prescription contains only one drug. In short, if a doctor prescribes more than one drug, a separate prescription must be written for each drug.)

Figure 16. The Implementation of a Ternary Relationship