Attributes are characteristics of entities. For example, the STUDENT entity includes the attributes STU_LNAME, STU_FNAME, and STU_INITIAL, among many others. In the original Chen notation, attributes are represented by ovals and are connected to the entity rectangle with a line. Each oval contains the name of the attribute it represents.

Figure 1. The Attributes of the Student Entity: Chen and Crow’s Foot

Required and Optional Attributes A required attribute is an attribute that must have a value; in other words, it cannot be left empty. As shown in Figure 1, the two boldfaced attributes in the Crow’s Foot notation indicate that data entry will be required.

An optional attribute is an attribute that does not require a value; therefore, it can be left empty.

DomainsAttributes have a domain. A domain is the set of possible values for a given attribute. For example, the domain for a grade point average (GPA) attribute is written (0,4) because the lowest possible GPA value is 0 and the highest possible value is 4. The domain for a gender attribute consists of only two possibilities: M or F (or some other equivalent code). The domain for a company’s date of hire attribute consists of all dates that fit in a range (e.g., company startup date to current date).

Attributes may share a domain. For instance, a student address and a professor address share the same domain of all possible addresses. In fact, the data dictionary may let a newly declared attribute inherit the characteristics of an existing attribute if the same attribute name is used. For example, the PROFESSOR and STUDENT entities may each have an attribute named ADDRESS and could therefore share a domain.

Identifiers (Primary Keys) The ERM uses identifiers—one or more attributes that uniquely identify each entity instance. In the relational model, entities are mapped to tables, and the entity identifier is mapped as the table’s primary key (PK). Identifiers are underlined in the ERD. Key attributes are also underlined in a frequently used shorthand notation for the table structure, called a relational schema, that uses the following format:

TABLE NAME (KEY_ATTRIBUTE 1, ATTRIBUTE 2, ATTRIBUTE 3, … ATTRIBUTE K)

For example, a CAR entity may be represented by

CAR (CAR_VIN, MOD_CODE, CAR_YEAR, CAR_COLOR)

Each car is identified by a unique vehicle identification number, or CAR_VIN.

Composite Identifiers Ideally, an entity identifier is composed of only a single attribute. For example, the table in Figure 2 uses a single-attribute primary key named CLASS_CODE.

A composite identifier is a primary key composed of more than one attribute.

Figure 2. The Class Table (Entity) Components and Contents

If the CLASS_CODE in Figure 4.2 is used as the primary key, the CLASS entity may be represented in shorthand form as follows:

CLASS (CLASS_CODE, CRS_CODE, CLASS_SECTION, CLASS_TIME, ROOM_CODE, PROF_NUM)

On the other hand, if CLASS_CODE is deleted, and the composite primary key is the combination of CRS_CODE and CLASS_SECTION, the CLASS entity may be represented as follows:

CLASS (CRS_CODE, CLASS_SECTION, CLASS_TIME, ROOM_CODE, PROF_NUM)

Note that both key attributes are underlined in the entity notation.

Composite and Simple Attributes. Attributes are classified as simple or composite. A composite attribute, not be confused with a composite key, is an attribute that can be further subdivided to yield additional attributes. For example, the attribute ADDRESS can be subdivided into street, city, state, and zip code. Similarly, the attribute PHONE_ NUMBER can be subdivided into area code and exchange number. A simple attribute is an attribute that cannot be subdivided. For example, age, sex, and marital status would be classified as simple attributes. To facilitate detailed queries, it is wise to change composite attributes into a series of simple attributes.

Single-Valued Attributes.A single-valued attribute is an attribute that can have only a single value. For example, a person can have only one Social Security number, and a manufactured part can have only one serial number. Keep in mind that a single-valued

attribute is not necessarily a simple attribute. For instance, a part’s serial number (such as SE-08-02-189935) is single-valued, but it is a composite attribute because it can be subdivided into the region in which the part was produced (SE), the plant within that region (08), the shift within the plant (02), and the part number (189935).

Multivalued Attributes.Multivalued attributes are attributes that can have many values. For instance, a person may have several college degrees, and a household may have several different phones, each with its own number. Similarly, a car’s color may be subdivided into many colors for the roof, body, and trim. In the Chen ERM, multivalued attributes are shown by a double line connecting the attribute to the entity. The Crow’s Foot notation does not identify multivalued attributes. The ERD in Figure 3 contains all of the components introduced thus far; note that CAR_VIN is the primary key, and CAR_COLOR is a multivalued attribute of the CAR entity.

Figure 3. Multivalued Attribute in an Entity

Implementing Multivalued Attributes

Remember from the previous modules, in relational table, each column and row intersection represent a single data value. So, if multivalued attributes exist, the designer must decide on one of the two possible courses of action:

1. Within the original entity, create several new attributes, one for each component of the original multivalued attribute. For example, the CAR entity’s attribute CAR_COLOR can be split to create the new attributes CAR_TOPCOLOR, CAR_BODYCOLOR, and CAR_TRIMCOLOR, which are then assigned to the CAR entity.

Figure 4. Splitting the Multivalued Attribute into New Attributes

2. Create a new entity composed of the original multivalued attribute’s components. This new entity allows the designer to define color for different sections of the car (see Table 1). Then, this new CAR_COLOR entity is related to the original CAR entity in a 1:M relationship.

Table 1. Components of the Multivalued Attribute

The ERM shown in Figure 5 reflects the components listed in Table 1. This is the preferred way to deal with multivalued attributes. Creating a new entity in a 1:M relationship with the original entity yields several benefits: it is a more flexible, expandable solution, and it is compatible with the relational model!

Figure 5. A New Entity Set Composed of a Multivalued Attribute’s Components

Derived Attributes Finally, a derived attribute is an attribute whose value is calculated (derived) from other attributes. The derived attribute need not be physically stored within the database; instead, it can be derived by using an algorithm. For example, an employee’s age, EMP_AGE, may be found by computing the integer value of the difference between the current date and the EMP_DOB.

Derived attributes are sometimes referred to as computed attributes. Computing a derived attribute can be as simple as adding two attribute values located on the same row, or it can be the result of aggregating the sum of values located on many table rows (from the same table or from a different table). The decision to store derived attributes in database tables depends on the processing requirements and the constraints placed on a particular application. The designer should be able to balance the design in accordance with such constraints. Table 2 shows the advantages and disadvantages of storing (or not storing) derived attributes in the database.

Figure 6. Depiction of a Derived Attribute

Table 2. Advantages and Disadvantages of Storing Derived Attributes