A recursive relationship is one in which a relationship can exist between occurrences of the same entity set. (Naturally, such a condition is found within a unary relationship.) For example, a 1:M unary relationship can be expressed by “an EMPLOYEE may manage many EMPLOYEEs, and each EMPLOYEE is managed by one EMPLOYEE.” Also, as long as polygamy is not legal, a 1:1 unary relationship may be expressed by “an EMPLOYEE may be married to one and only one other EMPLOYEE.” Finally, the M:N unary relationship may be expressed by “a COURSE may be a prerequisite to many other COURSEs, and each COURSE may have many other COURSEs as prerequisites.” Those relationships are shown in Figure 17.

Figure 17. An ER representation of recursive relationships

The 1:1 relationship shown in Figure 17 can be implemented in the single table shown in Figure 18. Note that you can determine that James Ramirez is married to Louise Ramirez, who is married to James Ramirez. Also, Anne Jones is married to Anton Shapiro, who is married to Anne Jones.

Figure 18. The 1:1 Recursive Relationship “Employee is Married to Employee”

Unary relationships are common in manufacturing industries. For example, Figure 19 illustrates that a rotor assembly (C-130) is composed of many parts, but each part is used to create only one rotor assembly. Figure 19 indicates that a rotor assembly is composed of four 2.5-cm washers, two cotter pins, one 2.5-cm steel shank, four 10.25-cm rotor blades, and two 2.5-cm hex nuts. The relationship implemented in Figure 19 thus enables you to track each part within each rotor assembly.

Figure 19. Another Unary Relationship: “Part contains Part”

If a part can be used to assemble several different kinds of other parts and is itself composed of many parts, two tables are required to implement the “PART contains PART” relationship. Figure 20 illustrates such an environment. Parts tracking increasingly important as managers become more aware of the legal ramifications of producing more complex output.

Figure 20. The Implementation of the M:N Recursive Relationship “Part contains Part”

The M:N recursive relationship might be more familiar in a school environment. For instance, note how the M:N “COURSE requires COURSE” relationship illustrated in Figure 17 is implemented in Figure 21. In this example, MATH-243 is a prerequisite to QM-261 and QM-362, while both MATH-243 and QM-261 are prerequisites to QM-362.

Finally, the 1:M recursive relationship “EMPLOYEE manages EMPLOYEE,” shown in Figure 17, is implemented in Figure 22.

Figure 21. Implementation of the M:N Recursive Relationship “Course requires Course”

Figure 22. Implementation of the 1:M Recursive Relationship “Employee Manages Employee”