A weak entity is one that meets two conditions:

The entity is existence-dependent; it cannot exist without the entity with which it has a relationship.

The entity has a primary key that is partially or totally derived from the parent entity in the relationship.

For example, a company insurance policy insures an employee and any dependents. For the purpose of describing an insurance policy, an EMPLOYEE might or might not have a DEPENDENT, but the DEPENDENT must be associated with an EMPLOYEE. Moreover, the DEPENDENT cannot exist without the EMPLOYEE; that is, a person cannot get insurance coverage as a dependent unless the person is a dependent of an employee. DEPENDENT is the weak entity in the relationship “EMPLOYEE has DEPENDENT.” This relationship is shown in Figure 10.

Figure 10. A Weak Entity in an ERD

Note that the Chen notation in Figure 10 identifies the weak entity by using a double- walled entity rectangle. The Crow’s Foot notation generated by Visio Professional uses the relationship line and the PK/FK designation to indicate whether the related entity is weak. A strong (identifying) relationship indicates that the related entity I weak. Such a relationship means that both conditions have been met for the weak entity definition—the related entity is existence-dependent, and the PK of the related entity contains a PK component of the parent entity.

Figure 11 illustrates the implementation of the relationship between the weak entity (DEPENDENT) and its parent or strong counterpart (EMPLOYEE). Note that DEPENDENT’s primary key is composed of two attributes, EMP_NUM and DEP_NUM, and that EMP_NUM was inherited from EMPLOYEE.

Figure 11. A Weak Entity in a Strong Relationship