Weak (Non-Identifying) Relationships. A weak relationship, also known as a non-identifying relationship, exists if the primary key of the related entity does not contain a primary key component of the parent entity. By default, relationships are established by having the primary key of the parent entity appear as a foreign key (FK) on the related entity (also known as the child entity). For example, suppose the 1:M relationship between COURSE and CLASS is defined as:

COURSE (CRS_CODE, DEPT_CODE, CRS_DESCRIPTION, CRS_CREDIT)

CLASS (CLASS_CODE, CRS_CODE, CLASS_SECTION, CLASS_TIME,

ROOM_CODE, PROF_NUM)

In this example, the CLASS primary key did not inherit a primary key component from the COURSE entity. In this case, a weak relationship exists between COURSE and CLASS because CRS_CODE (the primary key of the parent entity) is only a foreign key in the CLASS entity. Figure 8 shows how the Crow’s Foot notation depicts a weak relationship by placing a dashed relationship line between the entities. The tables shown below the ERD illustrate how such a relationship is implemented.

Figure 8. A Weak (Non-Identifying) Relationship between Course and Class

Strong (Identifying) Relationships. A strong (identifying) relationship exists when the primary key of the related entity contains a primary key component of the parent entity. For example, suppose the 1:M relationship between COURSE and CLASS is defined as:

COURSE (CRS_CODE, DEPT_CODE, CRS_DESCRIPTION, CRS_CREDIT)

CLASS (CRS_CODE, CLASS_SECTION, CLASS_TIME, ROOM_CODE, PROF_NUM)

In this case, the CLASS entity primary key is composed of CRS_CODE and CLASS_ SECTION. Therefore, a strong relationship exists between COURSE and CLASS because CRS_CODE (the primary key of the parent entity) is a primary key component in the CLASS entity. In other words, the CLASS primary key did inherit a primary key component from the COURSE entity. (Note that the CRS_CODE in CLASS is also the FK to the COURSE entity.)

The Crow’s Foot notation depicts the strong (identifying) relationship with a solid line between the entities, as shown in Figure 9.

Figure 9. A Strong (Identifying) Relationship between Course and Class