Participation in an entity relationship is either optional or mandatory.

Optional participation means that one entity occurrence does not require a corresponding entity occurrence in a particular relationship. For example, in the “COURSE generates CLASS” relationship, you noted that at least some courses do not generate a class. In other words, an entity occurrence (row) in the COURSE table does not necessarily require the existence of a corresponding entity occurrence in the CLASS table. (Remember that each entity is implemented as a table.) Therefore, the CLASS entity is considered to be optional to the COURSE entity.

Mandatory participation means that one entity occurrence requires a corresponding entity occurrence in a particular relationship. If no optionality symbol is depicted with the entity, the entity is assumed to exist in a mandatory relationship with the related entity. If the mandatory participation is depicted graphically, it is typically shown as a small hash mark across the relationship line, similar to the Crow’s Foot depiction of a connectivity of 1. The existence of a mandatory relationship indicates that the minimum cardinality is at least 1 for the mandatory entity.

Table 3 shows the various connectivity and participation combinations that are supported by the Crow’s Foot notation. Recall that these combinations are often referred to as cardinality in Crow’s Foot notation when specific cardinalities are not used.

Table 3. Crow’s Foot Symbols

Because relationship participation is an important component of database design, you should examine a few more scenarios. Suppose that Tiny College employs some professors who conduct research without teaching classes. If you examine the “PROFESSOR teaches CLASS” relationship, it is quite possible for a PROFESSOR not to teach a CLASS. Therefore, CLASS is optional to PROFESSOR. On the other hand, a CLASS must be taught by a PROFESSOR. Therefore, PROFESSOR is mandatory to CLASS. Note that the ERD model in Figure 12 shows the cardinality next to CLASS to be (0,3), indicating that a professor may teach no classes or as many as three classes. Also, each CLASS table row references one and only one PROFESSOR row—assuming each class is taught by one and only one professor—represented by the (1,1) cardinality next to the PROFESSOR table.

Figure 12. An Optional Class Entity in the Relationship “Professor teaches Class”

By analyzing the CLASS entity’s contribution to the “COURSE generates CLASS” relationship, it is easy to see that a CLASS cannot exist without a COURSE. Therefore, you can conclude that the COURSE entity is mandatory in the relationship. However, two scenarios for the CLASS entity may be written, as shown in Figures 13 and 14.

Figure 13. Class is Optional to Course

Figure 14. Course and Class in a Mandatory Relationship