Data Modeling and Data Models
Database design focuses on how the database structure will be used to store and manage end-user data.

Data modeling - refers to the process of creating a specific data model for a determined problem domain. (A problem domain is a clearly defined area within the real-world environment,with a well-defined scope and boundaries that will be systematically addressed.)

Data model - is a relatively simple representation, usually graphical, of more complex real-world data structures.

In general terms, a model is an abstraction of a more complex real-world object or event. A model’s main function is to help you understand the complexities of the real-world environment.

Data modeling is an iterative, progressive process. You start with a simple understanding of the problem domain, and as your understanding increases, so does the level of detail of the data model. When done properly, the fnal data model eﬀectively is a “blueprint” with all the instructions to build a database that will meet all end-user requirements. Tis blueprint is narrative and graphical in nature, meaning that it contains both text descriptions in plain, unambiguous language and clear, useful diagrams depicting the main data elements.

Traditionally, database designers relied on good judgment to help them develop a good data model. Unfortunately, good judgment is ofen in the eye of the beholder, and it ofen develops afer much trial and error.

For example, if each student in this class has to create a data model for a video store, it is very likely that each will come up with a diﬀerent model. Which one would be correct? The simple answer is “the one that meets all the end-user requirements,” and there may be more than one correct solution!

Fortunately, database designers make use of existing data-modeling constructs and powerful database design tools that substantially diminish the potential for errors in database modeling. In the following sections, you will learn how existing data models are used to represent real-world data and how the diﬀerent degrees of data abstraction facilitate data modeling.
The importance of data models
Data models can facilitate interaction among the designer, the applications programmer, and the end user. A well-developed data model can even foster improved understanding of the organization for which the database design is developed. In short, data models are a communication tool. This important aspect of data modeling was summed up neatly by a client whose reaction was as follows: “I created this business, I worked with this business for years, and this is the first time I’ve really understood how all the pieces really fit together.

The importance of data modeling cannot be overstated. Data constitutes the most basic information employed by a system. Applications are created to manage data and to help transform data into information, but data is viewed in different ways by different people. For example, contrast the view of a company manager with that of a company clerk. Although both work for the same company, the manager is more likely to have an enterprise-wide view of company data than the clerk.

The different users and producers of data and information often reﬂect the fable of the blind people and the elephant: the blind person who felt the elephant’s trunk had quite a different view from the one who felt the elephant’s leg or tail. A view of the whole elephant is needed. Similarly, a house is not a random collection of rooms; to build a house, a person should frst have the overall view that is provided by blueprints. Likewise, a sound data environment requires an overall database blueprint based on an appropriate data model.

When a good database blueprint is available, it does not matter that an applications programmer’s view of the data is different from that of the manager or the end user. Conversely, when a good database blueprint is not available, problems are likely to ensue. For instance, an inventory management program and an order entry system may use conﬂicting product-numbering schemes, thereby costing the company thousands or even millions of dollars.

Keep in mind that a house blueprint is an abstraction; you cannot live in the blueprint. Similarly, the data model is an abstraction; you cannot draw the required data out of the data model. Just as you are not likely to build a good house without a blueprint, you are equally unlikely to create a good database without frst creating an appropriate data model.