The quest for better data management has led to several models that attempt to resolve the previous model’s critical shortcomings and to provide solutions to ever-evolving data management needs. These models represent schools of thought as to what a database is, what it should do, the types of structures that it should employ, and the technology that would be used to implement these structures.

The hierarchical modelwas developed in the 1960s to manage large amounts of data for complex manufacturing projects, such as the Apollo rocket that landed on the moon in 1969. The model’s basic logical structure is represented by an upside-down tree. The hierarchical structure contains levels, or segments. A segment is the equivalent of a fle system’s record type. Within the hierarchy, a higher layer is perceived as the parent of the segment directly beneath it, which is called the child. Te hierarchical model depicts a set of one-to-many (1:M) relationships between a parent and its children segments. (Each parent can have many
children, but each child has only one parent.)

The network model was created to represent complex data relationships more eﬀectively than the hierarchical model, to improve database performance, and to impose a database standard. In the network model, the user perceives the network database as acollection of records in 1:M relationships. However, unlike the hierarchical model, the network model allows a record to have more than one parent. While the network database model is generally not used today, the defnitions of standard database concepts that emerged with the network model are still used by modern data models:

• The schema is the conceptual organization of the entire database as viewed by the
database administrator.
• The subschema defines the portion of the database “seen” by the application programs
that actually produce the desired information from the data within the database.
• A data manipulation language (DML) defines the environment in which data can
be managed and is used to work with the data in the database.
• A schema data definition language (DDL) enables the database administrator to
define the schema components.

As information needs grew and more sophisticated databases and applications were required, the network model became too cumbersome. The lack of ad hoc query capability put heavy pressure on programmers to generate the code required to produce even the simplest reports. Although the existing databases provided limited data independence, any structural change in the database could still produce havoc in all application programs that drew data from the database.

Example of Network Model commands

Retrieving records

find any <record type> using <record field>

Defining a record type (ex. customer)

type customer = record
customer name: string;
customer street: string;
customer city: string;
end

Relational Model

The Relational model was introduced in 1970 by E. F. Codd of IBM in his landmark paper “A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Databanks” (Communications of the ACM, June 1970, pp. 377–387). The relational model represented a major breakthrough for both users and designers. To use an analogy, the relational model produced an “automatic transmission” database to replace the “standard transmission” databases that preceded it. Its conceptual simplicity set the stage for a genuine database revolution.

The relational model’s foundation is a mathematical concept known as a relation. To avoid the complexity of abstract mathematical theory, you can think of a relation (sometimes called a table) as a two-dimensional structure composed of intersecting rows and columns. Each row in a relation is called a tuple. Each column represents an attribute. The relational model also describes a precise set of data manipulation constructs based on advanced mathematical concepts.

In 1970, Codd’s work was considered ingenious but impractical. The relational model’s conceptual simplicity was bought at the expense of computer overhead; computers at that time lacked the power to implement the relational model. Fortunately, computer power grew exponentially, as did operating system efficiency. Better yet, the cost of computers diminished rapidly as their power grew. Today, even PCs, which cost a fraction of what their mainframe ancestors cost, can run sophisticated relational database software such as Oracle, DB2, Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL, and other mainframe relational software.

The relational data model is implemented through a very sophisticated relational database management system (RDBMS). The RDBMS performs the same basic functions provided by the hierarchical and network DBMS systems, in addition to a host of other functions that make the relational data model easier to understand and implement (as outlined in Chapter 1, in the DBMS Functions section).

Arguably the most important advantage of the RDBMS is its ability to hide the complexities of the relational model from the user. The RDBMS manages all of the physical details, while the user sees the relational database as a collection of tables in which data is stored. Te user can manipulate and query the data in a way that seems intuitive and logical.

Another reason for the relational data model’s rise to dominance is its powerful and ﬂexible query language. Most relational database software uses Structured Query Language (SQL), which allows the user to specify what must be done without specifying how. The RDBMS uses SQL to translate user queries into instructions for retrieving the requested data. SQL makes it possible to retrieve data with far less eﬀort than any other database or fle environment.

Example of SQL Commands:

SELECT first_name, last_name FROM accounts;
UPDATE accounts SET first_name="Johnson" WHERE id=121133;

Object-Oriented Data Model / Semantic Model

Increasingly complex real-world problems demonstrated a need for a data model that more closely represented the real world. In the object-oriented data model (OODM), both data and its relationships are contained in a single structure known as an object. In turn, the OODM is the basis for the object-oriented database management system (OODBMS).

An OODM reflects a very different way to define and use entities. Like the relational model’s entity, an object is described by its factual content. But, quite unlike an entity, an object includes information about relationships between the facts within the object, as well as information about its relationships with other objects. Therefore, the facts within the object are given greater meaning. The OODM is said to be a semantic data model because semantic indicates meaning.

Object-oriented data model resembles the principles from Object-oriented Programming. More information about the OODM's components can be found at the book on page 48.

Object/Relational and XML

This is also called the extended relational data model (ERDM).

The ERDM adds many of the OO model’s features within the inherently simpler relational database structure. The ERDM gave birth to a new generation of relational databases that support OO features such as objects (encapsulated data and methods), extensible data types based on classes, and inher-itance. That’s why a DBMS based on the ERDM is often described as an object/relational database management system (O/R DBMS).

Within this environment, Extensible Markup Language (XML) emerged as the de facto standard for the efficient and effective exchange of structured, semistructured, and unstructured data.

Emerging Data Models: Big Data and NoSQL

Big Data refers to a movement to find new and better ways to manage large  amounts of web and sensor-generated data and derive business insight from it, while simultaneously providing high performance and scalability at a reasonable cost.

The term Big Data has been used in many different frameworks, from law to statistics to economics to computing. The term seems to have been first used in a computing framework by John Mashey, a Silicon Graphics scientist in the 1990s. However, it seems to be Douglas Laney, a data analyst from the Gartner Group, who first described the basic characteristics of Big Data databases: volume, velocity, and variety, or the 3 Vs.

Volume refers to the amounts of data being stored.

Velocity refers not only to the speed with which data grows but also to the need to process this data quickly in order to generate information and insight.

Variety refers to the fact that the data being collected comes in multiple different data formats.

In order to create value from their previously unused Big Data stores, companies are using new Big Data technologies. These emerging technologies allow organizations to process massive data stores of multiple formats in cost-effective ways. Some of the most frequently used Big Data technologies are Hadoop, MapReduce, and NoSQL databases.

Hadoop is a Java based, open source, high speed, fault-tolerant distributed storage and computational framework. Hadoop uses low-cost hardware to create clusters of thousands of computer nodes to store and process data. Hadoop originated from Google’s work on distributed file systems and parallel processing and is currently sup-ported by the Apache Software Foundation. Hadoop has several modules, but the two main components are Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) and MapReduce.

Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) is a highly distributed, fault-tolerant file storage system designed to manage large amounts of data at high speeds. In order to achieve high throughput, HDFS uses the write-once, read many model. This means that once the data is written, it cannot be modified.

MapReduce is an open source application programming interface (API) that pro-vides fast data analytics services. MapReduce distributes the processing of the data  among thousands of nodes in parallel. MapReduce works with structured and non-structured data.

NoSQL is a large-scale distributed database system that stores structured and unstructured data in efficient ways.

NoSQLDatabases
Every time you search for a product on Amazon, send messages to friends in Facebook, watch a video on YouTube, or search for directions in Google Maps, you are using a NoSQL database. As with any new technology, the term NoSQL can be loosely applied to many different types of technologies. However, this chapter uses NoSQLto refer to a new generation of databases that address the specific challenges of the Big Data era and have the following general characteristics:

• They are not based on the relational model and SQL, hence the name NoSQL.
• They support distributed database architectures.
• They provide high scalability, high availability, and fault tolerance.
• They support very large amounts of sparse data.
• They are geared toward performance rather than transaction consistency

NoSQL databases are not based on the relational model. In fact, there is no standard NoSQL data model. To the contrary, many different data models are grouped under the NoSQL umbrella, from document databases to graph stores, column stores, and key-value stores. It is still too early to know which, if any, of these data models will survive and grow to become a dominant force in the database arena. However, the early success of products such as Amazon’s SimpleDB, Google’s BigTable, and Apache’s Cassandra points to the  key-value stores and column stores as the early leaders. The word storesindicates that these data models permanently store data in secondary storage, just like any other database.
The Evolution of Data Models Summary Illustration

More information can be found in the reference book.