The basic building blocks of all data models are entities, attributes, relationships, and constraints.

An entityis a person, place, thing, or event about which data will be collectedand stored. An entity represents a particular type of object in the real world, which means an entity is “distinguishable”—that is, each entity occurrence is unique and distinct. For example, a CUSTOMER entity would have many distinguishable customer occurrences, such as John Smith, Pedro Dinamita, and Tom Strickland. Entities may be physical objects, such as customers or products, but entities may also be abstractions, such as ﬂight routes or musical concerts.

An attributeis a characteristic of an entity. For example, a CUSTOMER entity would be described by attributes such as customer last name, customer frst name, customer phone number, customer address, and customer credit limit. Attributes are the equivalent of fields in fle systems.

A relationshipdescribes an association among entities. For example, a relationship exists between customers and agents that can be described as follows: an agent can serve many customers, and each customer may be served by one agent. Data models use three types of relationships: one-to-many, many-to-many, and one-to-one. Database designers usually use the shorthand notations 1:M or 1..*, M:N or *..*, and 1:1 or 1..1, respectively. (Although the M:N notation is a standard label for the many-to-many relationship, the label M:M may also be used.) Te following examples illustrate the distinctions among the three relationships.

One-to-many (1:M or 1..*) relationship. A painter creates many diﬀerent paintings, but each is painted by only one painter. Tus, the painter (the “one”) is related to the paintings (the “many”). Terefore, database designers label the relationship “PAINTER paints PAINTING” as 1:M. Note that entity names are ofen capitalized as a convention, so they are easily identifed. Similarly, a customer (the “one”) may generate many invoices, but each invoice (the “many”) is generated by only a single customer. The “CUSTOMER generates INVOICE” relationship would also be labeled 1:M.

Many-to-many (M:N or *..*) relationship. An employee may learn many job skills, and each job skill may be learned by many employees. Database designers label the relationship “EMPLOYEE learns SKILL” as M:N. Similarly, a student can take many classes and each class can be taken by many students, thus yielding the M:N label for the relationship expressed by “STUDENT takes CLASS.”

One-to-one (1:1 or 1..1) relationship. A retail company’s management structure may require that each of its stores be managed by a single employee. In turn, each store manager, who is an employee, manages only a single store. Terefore, the relationship “EMPLOYEE manages STORE” is labeled 1:1

The preceding discussion identifed each relationship in both directions; that is, relationships are bidirectional:

• One CUSTOMER can generate many INVOICEs.
• Each of the many INVOICEs is generated by only one CUSTOMER

A constraint is a restriction placed on the data. Constraints are important because they help to ensure data integrity. Constraints are normally expressed in the form of rules:

• An employee’s salary must have values that are between 6,000 and 350,000.
• A student’s GPA must be between 0.00 and 4.00.
• Each class must have one and only one teacher.

How do you properly identify entities, attributes, relationships, and constraints? The frst step is to clearly identify the business rules for the problem domain you are modeling .

A business rule is a brief, precise, and unambiguous description of a policy, procedure, or principle within a specifc organization. In a sense, business rules are misnamed: they apply to any organization, large or small—a business, a government unit, a religious group, or a research laboratory—that stores and uses data to generate information.

Business rules derived from a detailed description of an organization’s operations help to create and enforce actions within that organization’s environment. Business rules must be rendered in writing and updated to reﬂect any change in the organization’s operational environment. Properly written business rules are used to define entities, attributes, relationships, and constraints.

Any time you see relationship statements such as “an agent can serve many customers, and each customer can be served by only one agent,” business rules are at work. You will see the application of business rules throughout this book, especially in the chapters devoted to data modeling and database design.

To be eﬀective, business rules must be easy to understand and widely disseminated to ensure that every person in the organization shares a common interpretation of the rules. Business rules describe, in simple language, the main and distinguishing characteristics of the data as viewed by the company. Examples of business rules are as follows:

• A customer may generate many invoices.
• An invoice is generated by only one customer.
• A training session cannot be scheduled for fewer than 10 employees or for more than
30 employees.