Introduction to MySQL primary key
A primary key is a column or a set of columns uniquely identifying each row in the table.  The primary key follows these rules:

A primary key must contain unique values. If the primary key consists of multiple columns, the combination of values in these columns must be unique.

A primary key column cannot haveNULLvalues. Any attempt toinsertorupdateNULLto primary key columns will result in an error. Note that MySQL implicitly adds aNOT NULLconstraint to primary key columns.

A table can have only one primary key.

Because MySQL works faster with integers, thedata typeof the primary key column should be the integer e.g.,INT, BIGINT. And you should ensure that the integer type value ranges for the primary key are sufficient for storing all possible rows that the table may have.

A primary key column often has theAUTO_INCREMENTattribute that automatically generates a sequential integer whenever youinsert a new rowinto the table.

When you define a primary key for a table, MySQL automaticallycreates an indexcalledPRIMARY.
MySQLPRIMARY KEYexamples
ThePRIMARY KEYconstraint allows you to define a table's primary key when youcreateor alter a table.
1) Define aPRIMARY KEYconstraint inCREATE TABLE
Typically, you define the primary key for a table in theCREATE TABLE statement.

If the primary key has one column, you can use thePRIMARY KEYconstraint as a column constraint:
CREATETABLE table_name(
primary_key_column datatype PRIMARY KEY,
...
);

When the primary key has more than one column, you must use thePRIMARY KEYconstraint as a table constraint.
CREATETABLE table_name(
primary_key_column1 datatype,
primary_key_column2 datatype,
...,
PRIMARY KEY(column_list)
);

In this syntax, you separate columns in thecolumn_listby commas (,).

ThePRIMARY KEYtable constraint can be used when the primary key has one column:
CREATETABLE table_name (
primary_key_column datatype,
... ,
PRIMARY KEY(primary_key_column)
);

The following examplecreates a tablenameduserswhose primary key is theuser_idcolumn:
CREATETABLEusers(
user_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
username VARCHAR(40),
passwordVARCHAR(255),
email VARCHAR(255)
);

This statement creates therolestable that has thePRIMARY KEYconstraint as the table constraint:
CREATETABLEroles(
role_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT,
role_name VARCHAR(50),
PRIMARY KEY(role_id)
);

If the primary key consists of multiple columns, you must specify them at the end of theCREATE TABLE statement. You put a comma-separated list of primary key columns inside parentheses following thePRIMARY KEY keywords.

The following example creates theuser_rolestable whose primary key consists of two columns:user_idandrole_id. It defines thePRIMARY KEYconstraint as the table constraint:
CREATETABLE user_roles(
user_id INT,
role_id INT,
PRIMARY KEY(user_id,role_id),
FOREIGNKEY(user_id)
REFERENCESusers(user_id),
FOREIGNKEY(role_id)
REFERENCESroles(role_id)
);

Note that the statement also created twoforeign keyconstraints.
2) DefinePRIMARY KEYconstraints usingALTER TABLE
If a table, for some reasons, does not have a primary key, you can use theALTER TABLEstatement to add a primary key to the table as follows:
ALTERTABLE table_name
ADD PRIMARY KEY(column_list);

The following example adds theidcolumn to the primary key.

First, create thepkdemostable without a primary key.
CREATETABLE pkdemos(
idINT,
title VARCHAR(255) NOTNULL
);

Second, add a primary key to thepkdemostable using theALTER TABLEstatement:
ALTERTABLE pkdemos
ADD PRIMARY KEY(id);

If you add a primary key to a table that already has data. The data in the column(s), which will be included in the primary key, must be unique and not NULL.
PRIMARY KEYvs.UNIQUE KEYvs.KEY
KEYis the synonym for INDEX. You use the KEYwhen you want tocreate an indexfor a column or a set of columns that is not the part of a primary key orunique key.

AUNIQUEindex ensures that values in a column must be unique. Unlike thePRIMARYindex, MySQL allowsNULLvalues in theUNIQUEindex. In addition, a table can have multipleUNIQUEindexes.

Suppose thatemailandusernameof users in theuserstable must be unique. To enforce thes rules, you can defineUNIQUEindexes for theemailandusernamecolumns as the following  statement:

Add a UNIQUEindex for theusernamecolumn:
ALTERTABLEusersADDUNIQUEINDEX username_unique (username ASC) ;

Add a UNIQUEindex for theemailcolumn:
ALTERTABLEusersADDUNIQUEINDEX  email_unique (email ASC) ;Introduction to MySQL foreign key
A foreign key is a column or group of columns in a table that links to a column or group of columns in another table. The foreign key places constraints on data in the related tables, which allows MySQL to maintain referential integrity.

Let’s take a look at the followingcustomersandorderstables from the[sample database](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-sample-database.aspx).

In this diagram, each customer can have zero or many orders and each order belongs to one customer.

The relationship betweencustomerstable andorderstable is one-to-many. And this relationship is established by the foreign key in theorderstable specified by thecustomerNumbercolumn.

ThecustomerNumbercolumn in theorderstable links to thecustomerNumberprimary key column in thecustomerstable.

Thecustomerstable is called the parent tableorreferenced table, and theorderstable is known as thechild tableorreferencing table.

Typically, the foreign key columns of the child table often refer to theprimary keycolumns of the parent table.

A table can have more than one foreign key where each foreign key references to a primary key of the different parent tables.

Once a foreign key constraint is in place, the foreign key columns from the child table must have the corresponding row in the parent key columns of the parent table or values in these foreign key column must beNULL(see theSET NULLaction example below).

For example, each row in theorderstable has acustomerNumberthat exists in thecustomerNumbercolumn of thecustomerstable. Multiple rows in theorderstable can have the samecustomerNumber.
Self-referencing foreign key
Sometimes, the child and parent tables may refer to the same table. In this case, the foreign key references back to the primary key within the same table.

See the followingemployeestable from the[sample database](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-sample-database.aspx).

ThereportTocolumn is a foreign key that refers to theemployeeNumbercolumn which is the primary key of theemployeestable.

This relationship allows theemployeestable to store the reporting structure between employees and managers. Each employee reports to zero or one employee and an employee can have zero or many subordinates.

The foreign key on the columnreportTois known as arecursiveorself-referencingforeign key.
MySQLFOREIGN KEYsyntax
Here is the basic syntax of defining a foreign key constraint in theCREATE TABLEorALTER TABLEstatement:
[CONSTRAINT constraint_name]
FOREIGN KEY [foreign_key_name] (column_name, ...)
REFERENCES parent_table(colunm_name,...)
[ON DELETE reference_option]
[ONUPDATE reference_option]

In this syntax:

First, specify the name of foreign key constraint that you want to create after theCONSTRAINTkeyword. If you omit the constraint name, MySQL automatically generates a name for the foreign key constraint.

Second, specify a list of comma-separated foreign key columns after theFOREIGN KEYkeywords. The foreign key name is also optional and is generated automatically if you skip it.

Third, specify the parent table followed by a list of comma-separated columns to which the foreign key columns reference.

Finally, specify how foreign key maintains the referential integrity between the child and parent tables by using theON DELETEandON UPDATEclauses.  Thereference_optiondetermines action which MySQL will take when values in the parent key columns are deleted (ON DELETE) or updated (ON UPDATE).

MySQL has five reference options:CASCADE,SET NULL,NO ACTION,RESTRICT, andSET DEFAULT.

CASCADE: if a row from the parent table is deleted or updated, the values of the matching rows in the child table automatically deleted or updated.

SET NULL:  if a row from the parent table is deleted or updated, the values of the foreign key column (or columns) in the child table are set toNULL.

RESTRICT:  if a row from the parent table has a matching row in the child table, MySQL rejects deleting or updating rows in the parent table.

NO ACTION: is the same asRESTRICT.

SET DEFAULT: is recognized by the MySQL parser. However, this action is rejected by both InnoDB and NDB tables.

In fact, MySQL fully supports three actions:RESTRICT,CASCADEandSET NULL.

If you don’t specify theON DELETEandON UPDATEclause, the default action isRESTRICT.
MySQLFOREIGN KEYexamples
Let’screate a new databasecalledfkdemofor the demonstration.
CREATEDATABASE fkdemo;

USE fkdemo;

RESTRICT&NO ACTIONactions
Inside thefkdemodatabase, create two tablescategoriesandproducts:
CREATETABLE categories(
categoryId INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
categoryName VARCHAR(100) NOTNULL
) ENGINE=INNODB;

CREATETABLE products(
productId INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
productName varchar(100) notnull,
categoryId INT,
CONSTRAINT fk_category
FOREIGNKEY (categoryId)
REFERENCES categories(categoryId)
) ENGINE=INNODB;

ThecategoryIdin theproductstable is the foreign key column that refers to thecategoryIdcolumn in the categoriestable.

Because we don’t specify anyON UPDATEandON DELETEclauses, the default action isRESTRICTfor both update and delete operation.

The following steps illustrate theRESTRICTaction.

1)Insert two rowsinto thecategoriestable:
INSERTINTO categories(categoryName)
VALUES
('Smartphone'),
('Smartwatch');

2)Selectdata from thecategoriestable:
SELECT * FROM categories;

3)Insert a new rowinto theproductstable:
INSERTINTO products(productName, categoryId)
VALUES('iPhone',1);

It works because thecategoryId1 exists in thecategoriestable.

4) Attempt to insert a new row into theproductstable with acategoryId  value does not exist in thecategoriestable:
INSERTINTO products(productName, categoryId)
VALUES('iPad',3);

MySQL issued the following error:
Error Code: 1452. Cannot add or update a child row: a foreign key constraint fails (`fkdemo`.`products`, CONSTRAINT `fk_category` FOREIGN KEY (`categoryId`) REFERENCES `categories` (`categoryId`) ON DELETE RESTRICT ON UPDATE RESTRICT)

5) Update the value in thecategoryIdcolumn in thecategoriestable to100:
UPDATE categories
SET categoryId = 100WHERE categoryId = 1;

MySQL issued this error:
Error Code: 1451. Cannot delete or update a parent row: a foreign key constraint fails (`fkdemo`.`products`, CONSTRAINT `fk_category` FOREIGN KEY (`categoryId`) REFERENCES `categories` (`categoryId`) ON DELETE RESTRICT ON UPDATE RESTRICT)

Because of theRESTRICToption, you cannot delete or updatecategoryId 1since it is referenced by theproductId1in theproductstable.
CASCADEaction
These steps illustrate howON UPDATE CASCADEandON DELETE CASCADEactions work.

1)Droptheproductstable:
DROPTABLE products;

2) Create theproductstable with theON UPDATE CASCADEandON DELETE CASCADEoptions for the foreign key:
CREATETABLE products(
productId INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
productName varchar(100) notnull,
categoryId INTNOTNULL,
CONSTRAINT fk_category
FOREIGNKEY (categoryId)
REFERENCES categories(categoryId)
ONUPDATECASCADEONDELETECASCADE
) ENGINE=INNODB;

3) Insert four rows into theproductstable:
INSERTINTO products(productName, categoryId)
VALUES
('iPhone', 1),
('Galaxy Note',1),
('Apple Watch',2),
('Samsung Galary Watch',2);

4) Select data from theproductstable:
SELECT * FROM products;

5) UpdatecategoryId1 to 100 in thecategoriestable:
UPDATE categories
SET categoryId = 100WHERE categoryId = 1;

6) Verify the update:
SELECT * FROM categories;

7) Get data from theproductstable:
SELECT * FROM products;

As you can see, two rows with value1in thecategoryIdcolumn of theproductstable were automatically updated to100because of theON UPDATE CASCADEaction.

8) DeletecategoryId2 from thecategoriestable:
DELETEFROM categories
WHERE categoryId = 2;

9) Verify the deletion:
SELECT * FROM categories;

10) Check theproductstable:
SELECT * FROM products;

All products withcategoryId2 from theproductstable were automatically deleted because of theON DELETE CASCADEaction.
SET NULLaction
These steps illustrate how theON UPDATE SET NULLandON DELETE SET NULLactions work.

1) Drop bothcategoriesandproductstables:
DROPTABLEIFEXISTS categories;
DROPTABLEIFEXISTS products;

2) Create thecategoriesandproductstables:
CREATETABLE categories(
categoryId INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
categoryName VARCHAR(100) NOTNULL
)ENGINE=INNODB;

CREATETABLE products(
productId INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
productName varchar(100) notnull,
categoryId INT,
CONSTRAINT fk_category
FOREIGNKEY (categoryId)
REFERENCES categories(categoryId)
ONUPDATESETNULLONDELETESETNULL
)ENGINE=INNODB;

The foreign key in theproductstable changed toON UPDATE SET NULLandON DELETE SET NULLoptions.

3) Insert rows into thecategoriestable:
INSERTINTO categories(categoryName)
VALUES
('Smartphone'),
('Smartwatch');

4) Insert rows into theproductstable:
INSERTINTO products(productName, categoryId)
VALUES
('iPhone', 1),
('Galaxy Note',1),
('Apple Watch',2),
('Samsung Galary Watch',2);

5) UpdatecategoryIdfrom 1 to 100 in thecategoriestable:
UPDATE categories
SET categoryId = 100WHERE categoryId = 1;

6) Verify the update:
SELECT * FROM categories;

7) Select data from theproductstable:

The rows with thecategoryId1 in theproductstable were automatically set toNULLdue to theON UPDATE SET NULLaction.

8) Delete thecategoryId2 from thecategoriestable:
DELETEFROM categories
WHERE categoryId = 2;

9) Check theproductstable:
SELECT * FROM products;

The values in thecategoryIdcolumn of the rows withcategoryId2 in theproductstable were automatically set toNULLdue to theON DELETE SET NULLaction.
Drop MySQL foreign key constraints
To drop a foreign key constraint, you use theALTER TABLEstatement:
ALTERTABLE table_name
DROPFOREIGNKEY constraint_name;

In this syntax:

First, specify the name of the table from which you want to drop the foreign key after theALTER TABLEkeywords.

Second, specify  the constraint name after theDROP FOREIGN KEYkeywords.

Notice thatconstraint_nameis the name of the foreign key constraint specified when you created or added the foreign key constraint to the table.

To obtain the generated constraint name of a table, you use theSHOW CREATE TABLEstatement:
SHOWCREATETABLE table_name;

For example, to see the foreign keys of theproductstable, you use the following statement:
SHOWCREATETABLE products;

The following is the output of the statement:

As you can see clearly from the output, the tableproductstable has one foreign key constraint:fk_category

And this statement drops the foreign key constraint of theproductstable:
ALTERTABLE products
DROPFOREIGNKEY fk_category;Code language:SQL (Structured Query Language)(sql)
To ensure that the foreign key constraint has been dropped, you can view the structure of the products table:
SHOWCREATETABLE products;

Disabling foreign key checks
Sometimes, it is very useful to disable foreign key checks e.g., when youimport data from a CSV file into a table. If you don’t disable foreign key checks, you have to load data into a proper order i.e., you have to load data into parent tables first and then child tables, which can be tedious. However, if you disable the foreign key checks, you can load data into tables in any order.

To disable foreign key checks, you use the following statement:
SET foreign_key_checks = 0;

And you can enable it by using the following statement:
SET foreign_key_checks = 1;