Earlier, we were talking about tables, but we didn’t say much about indexing. Let's summarize what we’ve learned so far. Consider the following declaration →

We’ve created a 10 element array of char and put a string “dump” there. Eventually, we consume 5 chars of the array.

Note that we've used apostrophes, not quotes.

Don't forget:

apostrophes:    char

quotes:     char *

Assuming that the following two statements have already been performed, we can guess that the word “damp” will be sent to the screen. It’s clear to us that the appearance of the array's name followed by a pair of brackets means that we want to access (to get or to modify) only one of the array's elements – the one with the index equal to the calculated value of the expression enclosed in brackets.

word[1] = 'a';

puts(word);

What’ll happen if we do something like this? -->

We can tell you what won't happen for sure:

the compiler won’t signal either an error or a warning;

the string contained in the array will not be changed.

What’ll be the effects of either of these assignments? Unfortunately, we can’t predict with absolute certainty what will happen. Depending on your compiler and/or operating system, your program may continue quite normally, or it may also terminate with a message indicating a memory protection violation. It’s also possible that you won't see anything and the program will end normally, producing results that don’t make much sense, but it’s also possible that, in a strange and magical way, some variables will have completely schizoid values.

That'll be due to the fact that the value you want to be assigned to the array element has gone elsewhere. It’s impossible to predict where it’s been deployed, but certainly, the potential consequences could be rather unpleasant.

Unfortunately, the burden of responsibility for indexing accuracy falls solely on the programmer. If you’re careless when dealing with indices, your program could fail, and searching for the reason will be very time-consuming.

So far we’ve treated the indexing operation as a natural feature of arrays, but now we’ll show you another, more surprising side of indexing. These well-known brackets [ and ] are nothing but an operator! This operator has the highest possible priority – it’s as high as the priority of the suffix ++ and -- operators. How does this happen?

Indexing Versus Pointers

The “C” language standard says: if any pointer is followed by an indexing operator, like this:

t[i]

it’s always taken as:

*(t + i)

In particular, this means that the following expression (sic! – an expression involving two arguments!)

word[1]

is treated by the compiler just like this one:

*(word + 1)

We need your attention for a second – we’re now going to explain step by step what that assumption means and what consequences can result from it.

The name word is interpreted as a pointer to the first element of the array.

It can be illustrated as follows →

The pointer is increased by one (word + 1).

This means the pointer is “shifted” toward the right by one element of the array.

You can see that in the figure to the side →

The increased pointer is an argument for the dereference operator, which means that it’s of type char, at least from a syntactic and semantic point of view. It’s also an l-value.

This means that this assignment is fully permissible →

The meaning of this assignment is exactly the same as the one here →

Take a look at the expression →

Can you explain why we used the parentheses? Are they necessary?

Yes, they are, due to the very high priority of the dereference operator (*).

We’ve removed the parentheses – what’ll happen now?

Firstly, the value (a character) pointed to by word is dereferenced.

Secondly, a value of 1 is added to the dereferenced character (not to the pointer itself).

That’s not what we wanted to achieve.

Now we’re going to show you something intriguing. You should be able to check it yourself, which is much more interesting than just reading about it.

if t is a pointer and i is an expression of type int, t[i] is equivalent to *(t + i);

the addition is commutative, so we can write the previous expression in the following way: *(i + t);

this also means that we’re allowed to write the same indexing operation as i[t].

This brings us to this conclusion – the [] operator is commutative.

Really.

The compiler doesn't care whether you write:

word[1] = 'a';

or

1[word] = 'a';

The first version is used most commonly due to developers' habits and the conventions used in other programming languages, and also because such notation is somewhat similar to classical algebraic standards.

We advise caution when constructing expressions using the * operator, since any lack of parentheses will not be detected by the compiler as syntax flaws.

Imagine a set of declarations →

char string[] = "ABC";

char *p;

char c;

Now we set p to point to the second element of the array string. The recommended form of this assignment is as follows:

p = string + 1;

Acceptable, though less elegant (however, some would argue, clearer), is the following form:

p = &string[1];

The p pointer will point to the second element of the array string – look at the figure →

Can you answer the question of what distinguishes these two instructions?

c = *p++;

and

c = (*p)++;

We can explain: the first assignment is as if the following two disjoint instructions have been performed;

c = *p;

p++;

In other words, the character pointed to by p is copied to the c variable; then, p is increased and points to the next element of the array.

The second assignment is performed as follows:

c = *p;

string[1]++;

The p pointer is not changed and still points to the second element of the array, and only this element is increased by 1.

flagschar string[] = "ABC";
char *p;
char c;

Imagine the following assignment:

p = string + 2;

p points to the third element of the string array. What happens now?

p[-1] = 'e';

It looks suspicious, because we’ve used the [] operator for a pointer that isn’t the name of an array. Is this legal? Can we do it?

Yes, it is, and we can. The compiler treats this as normal and thinks that we’re trying to do something like this:

*(p - 1) = 'e';

We want to change the element located before the one pointed to by the p pointer (in effect, it leads us to the second element of the array). The entire expression is treated as an l-value and is assigned the character 'e'.

flagschar string[] = "ABC";
char *p;
char c;