A structure cannot be a field of itself, but any of the structure's fields can be a pointer to the structure currently declared. Take a look at the declaration →

This is a recursive declaration, as the entity being declared refers to itself before the declaration is completed.

Declarations of this kind offer programmers very intriguing and exciting opportunities. They allow for the defining and processing of data of a very dynamic and changeable nature. Pointers inside structures allow data to relate to other instances in a very complicated way.

We’re now going to show you an example of this type of data, called a one-way linked list.

The idea of a one-way linked list is based on the observation that if we have a multitude of data (e.g. integers), we can link them together (some could say “aggregate them”), like beads on a thread, and attach the thread to any steady point. We can illustrate it as follows →
First, we design the data to be threaded in a particular way and decide what that thread would be. We suggest you imagine something like this:

the threaded elements are structures of the same type;

each of these structures will store an integer value (this is only for learning purposes – real data contained in the lists is obviously more sophisticated);

we assume that every structure will have a kind of hook which can “attach” to the next bead in the chain; it’ll be the functional equivalent of a pinhole through which we drag the thread;

the role of coupling will be played by one specific field that can store a pointer to the next element inside the chain;

the thread has to be permanently attached so we need a nail; we assign that role to the pointer variable commonly called "head" or "list header".

Look again at the ELEMENT structure declaration:

a field named value will serve as storage for any useful values;

a field named next will be used to “attach” to the next structure in the chain;

the first structure in the chain is “attached” to a head variable, declared as follows:

struct ELEMENT *head;

the last structure in the chain will be attached to nothing, so we’ll assign the NULL pointer value to its next field.

Let's imagine a thread with three beads on it – this is what it looks like →

We’re now going to print all the values recorded on the list. This isn’t as simple as it was for arrays. We can’t get to any element just by specifying its number, but instead, we must pass through all the previous elements.

We want to do this job in the following way:

we’ll use the head variable to access the first element;

we’ll use the next field of the first element to access the second element;

we’ll use the next field of the n - 1 element to access the nth element.

The snippet here →  lets us iterate over all the elements in the list and print the value field of each of them.

Analyze the example carefully until you’re sure that you understand every step.