Pointers are an extremely flexible and efficient tool for processing arrays and are very often used to create complex data structures. If you use them wisely and with due diligence, they won’t cause you any major problems. Used improperly or carelessly, they may create lots of terrible issues. We'll show you some typical mistakes in the hope that it’ll help protect you against similar troubles.

Mistake no. 1:  use of an uninitialized pointer

You make this mistake when you use a pointer that hasn’t previously been assigned any useful value and doesn't point to an existing variable or valid memory space. The compiler is unable to detect the error because its nature is revealed at run time only.

Consider the following example → [click here](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/44638/files/21715856/download?verifier=YG8FIVmCeOGnWql5SSua0ecWZqcQSqqAF8nGIxQr)

strcpy will use the current value of the ptr pointer to determine the location where the string specified in the second parameter should be copied. However, the ptr variable hasn’t been assigned. strcpy brings with it trouble.

The other side of the same mistake –[click here](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/44638/files/21715865/download?verifier=kRKRvrpkcM2NjwUStPXzHAmQuDqJZ1nCWMEi9UX8)

We try to dereference an uninitialized pointer. This won't end well, either.

Mistake no. 2:  exceeding the size of the array

This happens when you forget what the declared size of your array is. Look at this example → [click here](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/44638/files/21715866/download?verifier=0xlLpddhdjxrs4B99Uu4VuugVZcwhmrnTgt9R7lk)

See, we told the compiler that the str array will contain 10 elements and then recklessly told it to place a much longer string in there. Your program may finish its work with a message about a memory violation error, although if you’re unlucky, the program will go further, the results may have little in common with your intentions.

Mistake no. 3:  non-terminated strings

We have a 10-element array of characters. Unfortunately, we haven’t put a null character anywhere inside the array and therefore that string likely has no end.

The strcat function will persistently look for the end of the string and it’ll probably find one eventually (there’s a good chance that there is a byte containing a zero somewhere in the memory), but more than likely not within the str array itself. [Click here](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/44638/files/21715867/download?verifier=IiFHiMZ6eHqN4M7t2JkDmE3FMr7Wd9o7UiX3Lybf)