We’ve assumed thus far that arrays consist of scalars, but in fact, arrays can contain elements of a much more complex structure. Let’s consider the case when an array's elements are just arrays.

Surprising? Not at all! We often find arrays like this in our lives. Probably the best example of this is simply a chessboard.

What we’re going to say now will probably outrage experienced chess players, so we apologize in advance for all our simplifications and inaccuracies. If you’re a chess player…it’s nothing personal.

A chessboard is composed of rows and columns. There are 8 rows and 8 columns. Each column is marked with the letters A through H. Each row is marked with a number from 1 to 8. The location of each square is identified by letter-digit pairs. Thus, we know that the bottom right corner of the board (the one with the white rook) is A1, while the opposite corner is H8.

Let’s assume that we can use the selected int values to represent any chess piece. We can also assume that every row on the chessboard is a...vector!

Let's try to declare it – here it is →

Unfortunately, we have 8 of these rows. Does this mean that we have to declare 8 arrays like this?

int row1[8], row2[8], row3[8], row4[8], row5[8], row6[8], row7[8], row8[8];

Do you feel some sort of deja vu? We’ve already gone through a similar dilemma when we were trying to figure out the reason for using vectors.

A chessboard is in fact an 8-element array of elements as single rows. Let's summarize our observations:

elements of rows are fields, 8 of them per row;

elements of the chessboard are rows, 8 of them per chessboard

We’re now ready to create an array for the chessboard – here’s the declaration →

The chessboard variable is a two-dimensional array. It’s also called, by analogy to algebraic terms, a matrix.

The appearance of two pairs of brackets tells the compiler that the declared array is not a vector – it's an array whose elements are vectors.

Access to the selected field of our board requires two indices – the first selects the row,  the second, the field number inside the row, which is de facto a column number.

Look at our chessboard. Every field contains a pair of indices which should be given in order to access the field's content.

Glancing at the figure here →  we can set some chess pieces on our board. First, let's put all the rooks on the board:

chessboard[0][0] = ROOK;
chessboard[0][7] = ROOK;
chessboard[7][0] = ROOK;
chessboard[7][7] = ROOK;

If we wanted to place a knight on C4, we would do this as follows:

chessboard[3][2] = KNIGHT;

And now a pawn to E5:

chessboard[4][4] = PAWN;

As clear as checkmate, right?

Now let's go deeper into the multi-dimensional nature of arrays. To find any element of a two-dimensional array, we have to use two “coordinates”: a vertical (row number) one and a horizontal (column number) one. Imagine that we develop a piece of software for an automatic weather station. The device records the air temperature on an hourly basis and does it throughout the month. This gives us a total of 24 * 31 = 744 values. Let's try to design an array capable of storing all these results.

First, we have to decide which data type would be adequate for this application.  We think that a float would be the best, since our thermometer can measure the temperature with an accuracy of 0.1 degree Centigrade. Then we decide that the rows will record the readings every hour on the hour (so the row will have 24 elements) and each of the rows will be assigned to one day of the month (so we need 31 rows). Here’s the appropriate declaration →

Now we’ll try to determine the monthly average noon temperature. We’ll add all 31 readings recorded at noon and divide the sum by 31. We assume that the midnight temperature is stored first. Here's the relevant code along with the necessary declarations:

float temp[31][24];
int day;
float sum = 0.0, average;

for(day = 0; day < 31; day++)
sum += temp[day][11];
average = sum / 31;
printf("Average temperature at noon: %f", average);

Now let's find the highest temperature for the whole month – see the code →

We want to count the days when the temperature at noon was at least 20ºC.

We’re going to fill the entire array with zeros in order to prepare it for use in the coming month →

The “C” language doesn’t limit the size of the array's dimensions. Here we show an example of a 3-dimensional array.

Now imagine a hotel. It's a huge hotel consisting of three buildings, 15 floors each. There are 20 rooms on each floor. We need an array that can collect and process the information on the number of guests registered in each room.

Step one – the type of the array's element. We think an int would fit, although it can be unassigned as there’s no such thing as a negative number of guests.

Step two – calm analysis of the situation. Summarize the available information: 3 towers, 15 floors, 20 rooms.

Now we can write the declaration →

The first index (0 through 2) selects one of the buildings; the second (0 through 14) selects the floor, the third (0 through 19) selects the room number.

Now we can book a room for two newlyweds: in the second building, on the tenth floor, room fourteen:

guests[1][9][13] = 2;

and release the second room on the fifth floor located in the first building:

guests[0][4][1] = 0;

Before we say goodbye and finish this part of our course, let's check if there are any vacancies on the fifteenth floor of the third building:

int room;
int vacancy = 0;
for (room = 0; room <20; room++)
if (guests[2][14][room] == 0)
vacancy++;

The vacancy variable contains 0 if all the rooms are occupied; otherwise, it displays the number of available rooms.