We've seen that unusual type called void in our examples a few times. We used it to indicate that a function doesn't return a result, or doesn't expect any parameters. According to the following function prototype  →

the function should be invoked without parameters and return no result.

This is how we should invoke it:

nothingatall();

Despite the fact that the void type doesn't represent any useful value, you can still declare pointers to this type, as in the following example →

You may ask how to use a pointer that points to nothing and ask what such a pointer may be useful for. This kind of pointer, which is precisely of the type void *, is called an amorphous pointer to emphasize the fact that it can point to any value of any type. This means that a pointer of type void * cannot be subject to the dereference operator, so you must not write anything like this:

*ptr = 1;

It can be justified by the argument that if ptr was of type void * , *ptr would be of type void and the assignment of a value of type int is prohibited by the compiler.

However, pointers of type void * are very useful when you need to have a pointer, but don’t know what you’re going to use it for in the future. As soon as you know, the pointer can easily be converted into another pointer of the desired type (of course, a pointer one), a trick that’s always possible and doesn’t cause any loss of accuracy.

In the examples we’ve shown you so far, memory management has taken place outside of our awareness. The parts of the memory which we’ve used to store values have been hidden behind the names of scalars and arrays. They appear as soon as they’ve been declared and disappear when our program ends its operation. All work associated with memory allocation has been organized by the compiler and we haven’t cared about how it works. This is how it should be – high level languages and their compilers are designed to exonerate the developers' minds of these mundane tasks.

But very often the developer wants to have full control over how much memory is used and when exactly it is used. This is especially important when you don’t know in advance what the size of the data to be processed is. To manage the allocating and freeing of memory, the “C” language provides a set of specialized functions. Here we’ll show you two of them – we don’t need to go into too much depth, because you just need to understand the main rules.

Using both functions, however, requires the inclusion of the header file stdlib.h.

The first function is used to request access to the memory block of the specified size. The operating system can react in two ways: it either finds that there is free memory that could be given and our request is granted or, if the system is suffering from a shortage of memory, our request will be denied.

When the allocated memory is no longer needed and/or utilized, it would be a good idea to return it to the operating system. We do this by using the second of these two functions.

The function that performs the first task has the following prototype –>

the name of the function is a conflation of Memory ALLOCation;

its only parameter provides information about the size of the requested memory and is expressed in bytes;

the function returns a pointer of type void * which points to the newly allocated memory block, or is equal to NULL to indicate that the allocation requested could not be granted;

the function doesn’t have a clue as to what we want to use the memory for and therefore the result is of type void *; we’ll have to convert it to another usable pointer type;

the allocated memory area is not filled (initiated) in any way, so you should expect it to contain garbage.

The function invoked when the memory is no longer necessary has the following prototype –>

the function name doesn't require any comments;

the function does not return any results so its type is defined as void;

the function expects one parameter – the pointer to the memory block that is to be released; usually, it’s a pointer previously received from the malloc or its kindred; using another pointer value may cause some kind of disaster;

the function doesn't need to know the size of the freed block; you can only release the entire allocated block, not a part of it;

after performing the free function, all the pointers that point to the data inside the freed area become illegal; attempting to use them may result in abnormal program termination.

Now a few words about the pointer type conversion issue. Well, it’s performed in a way we’re already familiar with, using the conversion operator (also called type casting). Converting from void * to another pointer type always requires explicit typecasting. Transforming from any pointer type to the void * type doesn't require explicit typecasting.

We’re going to show you a complete, although not very useful, program that demonstrates the use of both functions.

We declare a variable called ptr which will point to the data of type int (the pointer's type is int *); initially, we assign no value to this variable;

We invoke the malloc function, requiring the allocation of a memory block sufficient to store one value of type int (sizeof (int)) – this enables our program to correctly execute, regardless of how many bytes are utilized by the int type in the specific implementation of the language and/or hardware platform;

The malloc's return value is assigned to the ptr variable using type casting, converting the pointer of the (void *) type into an
(int *) type

We need to check the resulting pointer value – if it’s not NULL, it can be safely used; our program assigns a value of 200 to the allocated memory, prints the value using the printf function and frees the memory;

If the memory allocation goes wrong, malloc returns NULL and we do nothing but print an error message.

[Click here for the sample code.](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/44638/files/21715868/download?verifier=31sQRoPHNnhdNlVtKG8OtdxJM2cmPsXpFrCkQtHB)

The option of allocating the amount of memory that we really need lets us write programs that can adapt themselves to the size of the data currently being processed. Let's go back to the bubble sort algorithm that we looked at some time ago. That program assumed that there were exactly 5 numbers to sort. This is obviously a serious inconvenience. It may happen one day that we want to sort 10,000 numbers or maybe even hundreds of thousands of numbers.

What then? You can, of course, declare an array of the maximum predictable size, but it would still be inconvenient. A much better way is to ask the user how many numbers will be sorted and then allocate an array of the appropriate size.

Let's try to start with a simpler example. In the following program, we allocate an array containing 5 elements of type int, set their values, sum them up and, finally, release the previously allocated memory. As you see, we’ve done so quite haphazardly and haven’t checked if the memory allocation has succeeded. It can be omitted in a program like this, but when we perform more complex tasks, we need to verify it.

We want you to pay attention to the fact that the pointer returned by malloc is treated as if it’s an array. Surprising?

The handling of dynamic arrays (created during the run of the program) is no different than using regular arrays declared in the usual way.

We owe it all to the [] operator. Regardless of the nature of the array, we can access its elements in the same way.