There is nothing preventing array elements from being pointers. Imagine that we need a dynamic array. The array is two-dimensional and we can’t predict how many rows or columns it’ll have. We only know that the number of columns is stored in the cols variable and the number of rows in the rows variable.

We’re not going to attempt to allocate the array in the following way:

int *ptrtab = (int *) malloc(rows * cols * sizeof(int));

At first glance, this might look quite reasonable, but getting around this array would in fact be very complicated because the compiler doesn't know anything about the size of the rows at compilation time and won’t be able to generate the correct indexing code.

The array relies on us to do the work. If we want to access the element in column c and row r, we would have to calculate the pointer to the element as follows:

ptrtab + (cols * r) + c

This is due to the fact that the “C” language arranges two-dimensional arrays row by row: the array begins with the first row, then the second, and so on. Consequently, to get to a particular row, you have to “skip” over all the preceding rows and this is what the (cols * r) is intended for (note that the numbering starts from zero!). Next, you have to skip to the element in column c (and hence the + c).

This is not a very satisfactory solution, at least to us. We definitely prefer to use a clearer notation, like this:

ptrtab[r][c]

Is this possible?

Yes, it is possible.

This is how we do it:

to avoid the inconvenience of skipping over the subsequent rows, we’ll store the pointer to the beginning of every row so we can reach each row without any acrobatics. How do we store these pointers? In the array, of course! We’ll call it the array of rows; every row will have as many elements as columns of the desired array;

every element in the array of rows will be a pointer to a separate row;

we need one more pointer to point to the array of rows – we call it ptrtab.

Let's look at the figure illustrating the essence of our idea →

What’s the type of the variable ptrtab?

First, let's say what type it isn't: it’s certainly not a pointer to an int (int *). This is because the result of dereferencing the ptrtab is not an int but a pointer to int.

This means that the type of ptrtab is “a pointer to a pointer to int", which is denoted as “int**”

We can write a complete declaration now →

Once we’ve declared the pointer, we can allocate the array of rows. This is done as follows →

Let us explain the meaning of this clause.

Firstly, the pointer returned by malloc surrenderis converted to type int ** and assigned to ptrtab.

Secondly, the elements of the array of rows are pointers to the rows, so their type is int * and hence, the size of the array is expressed as sizeof (int *) multiplied by the number of rows.

Finally, we need to allocate memory for every row and store the resulting pointer inside the right element of the array of rows.

Definitely the easiest way to do this is to utilize a loop →

It’s surprisingly simple to use this kind of array.

For example, if we want to assign 0 to the element lying in row r, column c, we'll do it this way →