Imagine that we, the developers, have the following job to do: we’re obliged to design a data structure that can store information about students attending our course. It needs to store the name of each student, the time spent on studying the chapters, and the number of the last completed chapter. We know that the total number of all students will not exceed 100,000. We also know that most names are rarely longer than 25 characters and this leads us to write the following declaration →

The array allows us to store 100,000 names of up to 25 characters. Wait a minute – you might say – if it’s 25 characters, why did we write “26” in the declaration? We just reserved one more character for the terminating (closing) character, that’s all.

Let's try to manipulate that array. For example, suppose that the first registered student was Mr. Bond (James Bond). Let’s store the information in our array:

strcpy(student_name[0],"Bond");

The time spent on the site will be stored as a float. This is not particularly convenient, but we can certainly handle it. The number of hours will be represented as a decimal fraction. This leads us directly to the following statement →

We know that Mr. Bond spent three hours and thirty minutes studying our course. We’ll denote it in the following way:

student_time[0] = 3.5;

Note: 3h30m = 3 and a half hours, thus 3.5.

A structure contains any number of elements of any type. Each of these elements is called a field. Each field is identified by its name, not by its number. Obviously, the field names must be unique and cannot be doubled within a single structure. We’ll show you how to declare a structure suitable for our needs and we’ll explain its meaning.
Here’s the declaration of the structure →

the declaration of the structure always starts with the keyword struct;

a structtag is placed after the keyword (STUDENT in the case); it's the name of the structure itself; there’s a widely accepted custom of composing structure tags with capital letters only to distinguish them from ordinary variables;

here comes the opening curly bracket – a sign that the field declaration begins at this point;

our structure has three fields: the first is a 26-element array of type char and is called name; the second is a float and is called time, and the third is an int and is called recent_chapter;

the declaration ends with the closing curly bracket followed by a semicolon.

We should emphasize that the previous declaration doesn't create a variable, but only describes the structure we’re going to use in our program. If we want to declare a variable as a structure, we do it as follows →

This declaration sets up a variable (a structured variable) named stdnt. The variable stdnt is of type struct STUDENT. We know that this variable consists of three named fields, but we don’t yet know how to access them.

As the “C” language offers a specialized indexing operator [] for arrays, we also have the selection operator, designed for structures and denoted as a single character. (dot).

The priority of the selection operator is very high, equal to the priority of the [] operator.

This is a binary operator. Its left argument must identify the structure while the right argument must be the name of the field known in this structure.

The result of this operator is the selected field of structure, and therefore the expression containing this operator is sometimes called a selector.

This means that the selector here →   results in the selection of a field named time. The type of this expression is the type of the selected field and this expression is an l-value.

Consequently, you can use both of these selectors:

stdnt.time = 1.5;

and

float t;

t = stdnt.time;

Virtually any data could be used as a structure's field: scalars (including pointers), arrays and also almost all of the structures. We say “almost” because a structure cannot be a field of itself.

Structures can be aggregated inside an array, so if we want to declare an array consisting of STUDENT structures, we do it in this way →

Access to the selected fields requires two subsequent operations:

in the first step, the [] operator indexes the array in order to access the structure we need;

In the second step, the selection operator selects the desired field.

This means that if we want to select the time field of the fourth stdnts' element, we write it as follows:

stdnts[3].time

We’ve collected all these assignments which have been performed for the three separate arrays. Analyze them carefully:

strcpy(stdnts[0].name, "Bond");
stdnts[0].time = 3.5;
stdnts[0].recent_chapter = 4;

For the purposes of simplicity, we’ll use a simple structure designed to store the date. It’s equipped with three fields, each of type int, named year, month, and day, easy-to-understand names that clearly indicate their role and purpose.

The first possible way of declaring the structure is here →

Of course, we can write this declaration much more compactly:

struct DATE {
int year,month,day;
};

Both variants are equivalent.

That declaration doesn't create any new variables but only announces to the compiler our intention to use this structure tag to declare new variables. The new variable would be declared, for example, in this way:

struct DATE DateOfBirth;

We can use it to store Harry Potter's date of birth:

DateOfBirth.year = 1980;
DateOfBirth.month = 7;
DateOfBirth.day = 31;

We can also use the structure tag to declare an array of structures:

struct DATE visits[100];

It’s also possible to kill two birds with one stone by defining the structure tag and declaring any number of variables simultaneously in the same statement, like this:

struct DATE {
int year, month, day;
} DateOfBirth, visits[100];

struct DATE current_date;

We can also omit the tag and declare the variables only:

struct {
int year, month, day;
} the_date_of_the_end_of_the_world;

In this case, however, determining the type of the variable the_date_of_the_end_of_the_world (e.g. if we want to use it with the sizeof operator) becomes troublesome. Without a tag it has to be denoted as:

sizeof(struct {int year, month, day;})

We find it too complex and unreadable, compared to sizeof(struct DATE).

A structure could be a field inside another structure. Imagine that we have to extend our STUDENT structure and add a field to save the date when a particular student last accessed the course. We can do it this way →

It means that we’ll have to use two subsequent selection operations to go deeper into the structure i.e. first we select a structure within the structure and then we select the desired field of the inner structure.

This is how it works:

HarryPotter.last_visit.year = 2012;
HarryPotter.last_visit.month = 12;
HarryPotter.last_visit.day = 21;

So now you should be able to answer the following question: when did Harry visit us recently?