A structure's field names may overlap with the tag names, and this is generally not considered a problem, although it may cause some difficulty in reading and understanding the program.

The snippet shown here → is completely correct

It may happen that a particular compiler doesn't like it when a structure's tag name overlaps with a variable's name – therefore, it's better to avoid tricks like the ones shown here →

Two structures can contain fields with the same names – the following snippet is correct →

Structures can be initialized as early as at the time of declaration. The structure's initiator is enclosed in curly brackets and contains a list of valuesassigned to the subsequent fields, starting from the first.

The values listed in the initiator must conform to the types of the fields. If the initiator contains fewer elements than the number of the structure's fields, it’s presumed that the list is automatically extended with zeros.

If the particular field is an array or a structure, it should have its own initiator, which is also subject to the rule of zero extension. If an “internal” initiator is complete, we can omit the surrounding curly parentheses.

Take a look at the example →

This initiator is equivalent to the following sequence of assignments:

date.year = 2012;
date.month = 12;
date.day = 21;

The initiator of this form is functionally equivalent to the following assignments:

strcpy(he.name, "Bond");
he.time = 3.5;
he.recent_chapter = 4;
he.last_visit.year = 2012
he.last_visit.month = 12;
he.last_visit.day = 21;

Due to the completeness of the inner initializer, it can be written in the following, simplified form:

struct STUDENT he = { "Bond", 3.5, 4, 2012, 12, 21 };
This type of simplification (omitting internal curly braces) can also be applied in the following case (with caution, though):

struct STUDENT she = { "Mata Hari", 12., 12, { 2012 }  };

The internal initiator, referring to the last_visit field, doesn't cover all the fields. This means that it’ll be equivalent to the following sequence of assignments:

strcpy(she.name, "Mata Hari");
she.time = 12.;
she.recent_chapter = 12;
she.last_visit.year = 2012
she.last_visit.month = 0;
she.last_visit.day = 0;

What happens when we apply an “empty” initializer? -->

Here's the answer:

strcpy(nobody.name, "");
nobody.time = 0.0;
nobody.recent_chapter = 0;
nobody.last_visit.year = 0;
nobody.last_visit.month = 0;
nobody.last_visit.day = 0;