Let's declare a pointer to the structures of type struct STUDENT. Here’s how it goes →

If we want to allocate memory for one structure, we can do it in the following way:

sptr = (struct STUDENT *) malloc(sizeof(struct STUDENT));

As you can see, there’s nothing all that surprising here.

The sptr points to a piece of memory that can be used as if it were a “regular” structure of type struct STUDENT. The selection operator believes its left argument is a structure, while the right argument it thinks is the name of the field. The following dereference identifies the entire structure:

*sptr

Unfortunately, an expression like the one below is invalid:

*sptr.time= 1.0;

This error is caused by the very high priority of the selection operator – it’s higher than the priority of the dereference operator, so the entire expression will be interpreted as follows:

*(sptr.time)

That is, it’ll be interpreted as if sptr is a structure (it is not!). It forces us to take into account the mutual arrangement of both these operators and to write the expression with additional parentheses:

(*sptr).time

The parentheses guarantee that the first operation performed is dereferencing, not selecting.

Because this notation is obviously cumbersome and lengthy, an additional convention was introduced to the “C” language which is used to express simultaneous dereferencing and selecting.

We do it with the -> operator (note that the “arrow” is composed of two characters – it' s a digraph). It’s assumed that:

the left argument is an expression that evaluates a pointer to the structure;

the right argument is the name of the field of the structure pointed to;

the result is an l-value identifying the desired structure's field, dereferenced from the pointer

This means that the form:

pointer -> field

is by definition equal to the form:

(*pointer).field

We can use this information to assign some values to the fields of the newly allocated structure:

strcpy(sptr -> name, "Dobby");
sptr -> time = 0.1;
sptr -> recent_chapter = 0;
sptr -> last_visit.year = 2002;
sptr -> last_visit.month = 1;
sptr -> last_visit.day = 1;

Now, summing up the topic of data aggregates, we’re going to show you a very odd incarnation of a structure named union. The name isn’t very illustrative and probably won’t give you much idea of where the difference between structures and unions is. Syntactically, they’re both very similar. You only have to replace the keyword struct with union and the whole declaration remains valid. The real clue is hidden deeper – inside the computer‘s memory.

Take a look at the example → There are two (almost identical) declarations of variables named Data1 and Data2, respectively. The first one is a structure. The second one is a union. They both have two fields named a and b. Accessing the fields is identical in both cases:

Data1.a = 0;
Data2.b = 0;

So…what is the problem? Where’s the difference? We'll get back to this later.

In a structure, all its fields are placed successively. Every field has its own part of the computer memory. In other words: each field is a separate world and they don’t overlap. Modifying the a field will leave the b field intact and vice versa.

This also means that the size of the structure is not less than the total size of all its fields.

Note: not less – not equal.

In contrast, in a union, all its fields are placed in the same memory location. This means that the a and b fields share the same part of the memory or, in other words, their contents are indistinguishable.

This fact has at least one interesting implication: the union’s initializer has to have one element (as there is actually only one value to initialize).

It means also that modifying the a field will modify the b field immediately (or rather, simultaneously).

The program here → will output two values: 0 and 1. Can you explain why?

We’re sure you can. [Click this for the code.](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/44638/files/21715869/download?verifier=6A4zW2rqi1sAa7U6uJvytBKYeVahwaAe2cY0pkxB)

When all (both in our case) union fields are of the same type, we can predict the result of the assignment. Take a look at a more interesting example here →

The Data union is equipped with two fields of radically different types: int and float. As you already know (don’t you?), these types use a completely different method of internal representation. Assigning the a field with the value of 1 won’t set the b field with anything even close to 1.

We suggest you compile our code and do some experiments yourself. Use really big integers if you want to see some strange effects. Very large (in absolute value) negative numbers are even better. But, be prepared for a few surprises.

Fortunately, zero is represented (i.e. stored in the memory) exactly in the same way inside floats as in ints. Unfortunately, only zero has this interesting and curious feature.

To summarize union and structure differences:

the size of the memory: in struct, it’s the sum of all members sizes; in union, only max member size is important,

only one member of a union can be accessed at one time, and of course all members of a struct,

a union stores only one value (except some tricky code); a struct stores all the values of members.

You may ask: what’s it for? Are unions really usable? Are they really needed?

We’ll discuss these issues in the next stage of our education – during the C Language Professional course. For now, sit tight.