Relationships with the Relational Database
You already know that relationships are classified as one-to-one (1:1), one-to-many (1:M), and many-to-many (M:N or M:M). This section explores those relationships further to help you apply them properly when you start developing database designs. This section focuses on the following points:

• The 1:M relationship is the relational modeling ideal. Therefore, this relationship type should be the norm in any relational database design.
• The 1:1 relationship should be rare in any relational database design.
• M:N relationships cannot be implemented as such in the relational model. Later in this section, you will see how any M:N relationship can be changed into two 1:M relationships.

The 1:M Relationship
The 1:M relationship is the norm for relational databases. To see how such a relationship is modeled and implemented, consider the PAINTER and PAINTING example shown in Figure 3.17.

Compare the data model in Figure 3.17 with its implementation in Figure 3.18. As you examine the PAINTER and PAINTING table contents in Figure 3.18, note the following features:

• Each painting was created by one and only one painter, but each painter could have created many paintings. Note that painter 123 (Georgette P. Ross) has three works stored in the PAINTING table.
• There is only one row in the PAINTER table for any given row in the PAINTING table, but there may be many rows in the PAINTING table for any given row in the PAINTER table.

The 1:M relationship is found in any database environment. Students in a typical college or university will discover that each COURSE can generate many CLASSes but that each CLASS refers to only one COURSE. For example, an Accounting II course might yield two classes: one oﬀered on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday (MWF) from 10:00 a.m. to 10:50 a.m., and one oﬀered on Tursday (T) from 6:00 p.m. to 8:40 p.m. Therefore, the 1:M relationship between COURSE and CLASS might be described this way:

• Each COURSE can have many CLASSes, but each CLASS references only one COURSE.
• There will be only one row in the COURSE table for any given row in the CLASS table, but there can be many rows in the CLASS table for any given row in the COURSE table.

Figure 3.19 maps the ERM (entity relationship model) for the 1:M relationship between COURSE and CLASS.

The 1:M relationship between COURSE and CLASS is further illustrated in Figure 3.20. Using Figure 3.20, take a minute to review some important terminology. Note that CLASS_CODE in the CLASS table uniquely identifies each row. Therefore, CLASS_ CODE has been chosen to be the primary key. However, the combination CRS_CODE and CLASS_SECTION will also uniquely identify each row in the class table. In other words, the composite key composed of CRS_CODE and CLASS_SECTION is a candidate key. Any candidate key must have the not-null and unique constraints enforced. (You will see how this is done when you learn SQL in Chapter 7.)

For example, note in Figure 3.18 that the PAINTER table’s primary key, PAINTER_NUM, is included in the PAINTING table as a foreign key. Similarly, in Figure 3.20, the COURSE table’s primary key, CRS_CODE, is included in the CLASS table as a foreign key.

The 1:1 Relationship
As the 1:1 label implies, one entity in a 1:1 relationship can be related to only one other entity, and vice versa. For example, one department chair—a professor—can chair only one department, and one department can have only one department chair. The entities PROFESSOR and DEPARTMENT thus exhibit a 1:1 relationship. (You might argue that not all professors chair a department and professors cannot be required to chair a department. Tat is, the relationship between the two entities is optional. However, at this stage of the discussion, you should focus your attention on the basic 1:1 relationship. Optional relationships will be addressed in Chapter 4.) Te basic 1:1 relationship is modeled in Figure 3.21, and its implementation is shown in Figure 3.22.

As you examine the tables in Figure 3.22, note several important features:

• Each professor is a Tiny College employee. Terefore, the professor identifcation is through the EMP_NUM. (However, note that not all employees are professors— there’s another optional relationship.)
• The 1:1 “PROFESSOR chairs DEPARTMENT” relationship is implemented byhaving the EMP_NUM foreign key in the DEPARTMENT table. Note that the 1:1 relationship is treated as a special case of the 1:M relationship in which the “many” side is restricted to a single occurrence. In this case, DEPARTMENT contains the EMP_NUM as a foreign key to indicate that it is the department that has a chair.

Also note that the PROFESSOR table contains the DEPT_CODE foreign key to implement the 1:M “DEPARTMENT employs PROFESSOR” relationship. This is a good example of how two entities can participate in two (or even more) relationships simultaneously. The preceding “PROFESSOR chairs DEPARTMENT” example illustrates a proper 1:1 relationship. In fact, the use of a 1:1 relationship ensures that two entity sets are not placed in the same table when they should not be. However, the existence of a 1:1 relationship sometimes means that the entity components were not defned properly. It could indicate that the two entities actually belong in the same table! Although 1:1 relationships should be rare, certain conditions absolutely require their use. In Chapter 5, Advanced Data Modeling, you will explore a concept called a generalization hierarchy, which is a powerful tool for improving database designs under specific conditions to avoid a proliferation of nulls. One characteristic of generalization hierarchies is that they are implemented as 1:1 relationships.
The M:N Relationship
A many-to-many (M:N) relationship is not supported directly in the relational environment. However, M:N relationships can be implemented by creating a new entity in 1:M relationships with the original entities. To explore the many-to-many relationship, consider a typical college environment. The ER model in Figure 3.23 shows this M:N relationship.

Note the features of the ERM in Figure 3.23.

• Each CLASS can have many STUDENTs, and each STUDENT can take many
CLASSes.
• There can be many rows in the CLASS table for any given row in the STUDENT table,
and there can be many rows in the STUDENT table for any given row in the CLASS
table.

To examine the M:N relationship more closely, imagine a small college with two students, each of whom takes three classes. Table 3.7 shows the enrollment data for the two students. Given such a data relationship and the sample data in Table 3.7, you could wrongly assume that you could implement this M:N relationship simply by adding a foreign key in the “many” side of the relationship that points to the primary key of the related table, as shown in Figure 3.24.

However, the M:N relationship should not be implemented as shown in Figure 3.24 for two good reasons:

• The tables create many redundancies. For example, note that the STU_NUM values occur many times in the STUDENT table. In a real-world situation, additional student attributes such as address, classification, major, and home phone would also be contained in the STUDENT table, and each of those attribute values would be repeated in each of the records shown here. Similarly, the CLASS table contains much duplication: each student taking the class generates a CLASS record. The problem would be even worse if the CLASS table included such attributes as credit hours and course description. Those redundancies lead to the anomalies discussed in Chapter 1.

• Given the structure and contents of the two tables, the relational operations become very complex and are likely to lead to system efficiency errors and output errors.

Fortunately, the problems inherent in the many-to-many relationship can easily be avoided by creating a composite entity (also referred to as a bridge entity or an associative entity). Because such a table is used to link the tables that were originally related in an M:N relationship, the composite entity structure includes—as foreign keys—at least the primary keys of the tables that are to be linked. Te database designer has two main options when defining a composite table’s primary key: use the combination of those foreign keys or create a new primary key.

Remember that each entity in the ERM is represented by a table. Therefore, you can create the composite ENROLL table shown in Figure 3.25 to link the tables CLASS and STUDENT. In this example, the ENROLL table’s primary key is the combination of its foreign keys CLASS_CODE and STU_NUM.

Because the ENROLL table in Figure 3.25 links two tables, STUDENT and CLASS, it is also called a linking table. In other words, a linking table is the implementation of a composite entity.

The 1:M relationship between COURSE and CLASS was frst illustrated in Figure 3.19 and Figure 3.20. You can increase the amount of available information even as you control the database’s redundancies. Tus, Figure 3.27 shows the expanded ERM, including the 1:M relationship between COURSE and CLASS shown in Figure 3.19. Note that the model can handle multiple sections of a CLASS while controlling redundancies by making sure that all of the COURSE data common to each CLASS are kept in the COURSE table.

The relational diagram that corresponds to the ERM in Figure 3.27 is shown in Figure 3.28.