Summary
• Tables are the basic building blocks of a relational database. A grouping of related entities, known as an entity set, is stored in a table. Conceptually speaking, the relational table is composed of intersecting rows (tuples) and columns. Each row represents a single entity, and each column represents the characteristics (attributes) of the entities.
• Keys are central to the use of relational tables. Keys define functional dependencies; that is, other attributes are dependent on the key and can therefore be found if the key value is known. A key can be classified as a superkey, a candidate key, a primary key, a secondary key, or a foreign key.
• Each table row must have a primary key. The primary key is an attribute or combination of attributes that uniquely identifes all remaining attributes found in any given row. Because a primary key must be unique, no null values are allowed if entity integrity is to be maintained.

• Although tables are independent, they can be linked by common attributes. Thus, the primary key of one table can appear as the foreign key in another table to which it is linked. Referential integrity dictates that the foreign key must contain values that match the primary key in the related table, or must contain nulls.

• A relational database performs much of the data manipulation work behind the scenes. For example, when you create a database, the RDBMS automatically produces a structure to house a data dictionary for your database. Each time you create a newtable within the database, the RDBMS updates the data dictionary, thereby providing the database documentation.
• Once you know the basics of relational databases, you can concentrate on design. Good design begins by identifying appropriate entities and their attributes and then the relationships among the entities. Those relationships (1:1, 1:M, and M:N) can be represented using ERDs. The use of ERDs allows you to create and evaluate simple logical design. The 1:M relationship is most easily incorporated in a good design; just make sure that the primary key of the “1” is included in the table of the “many