What is parallel programming, and how does it work?

Source: https://hpc.llnl.gov/documentation/tutorials/introduction-parallel-computing-tutorial

Parallel programming is often used interchangeably with the terms parallel processing, parallel computing, and parallel computing solutions. Parallel programming is like running 10 burrito rolling stations in parallel instead of slowly making 100 burritos yourself. In computer science terms,parallel programming is the process of splitting a problem into smaller tasks that can be executed at the same time – in parallel – using multiple computing resources.In other words, parallel programming allows programmers to run large-scale projects that require speed and accuracy.

You can use parallel processing techniques on various devices, from mobile devices to laptops to supercomputers. Different programming languages rely on different technologies to enable parallelism. Open multi-processing (OpenMP) provides a cross-platform API for developing parallel applications using C, C++, and Fortran across the cores of a single CPU.

On the other hand, technologies such as the message passing interface (MPI) enable parallel processes between different computers or nodes.
What are the different parallel programming models?
Parallel programming is an umbrella concept that can describe many types of processes that run simultaneously on the same machine or on different machines. Before we dive in, let’s distinguish between some popular parallel programming models:

The shared memory model

The message-passing model

The partitioned global address space model

These models describe how processes interact with one another in parallel programming. Let’s look at each of these, as well as some of the principles of parallel programming, in more detail below.
What is data parallelism?
Data parallelism is taking a given task and splitting its execution by the work to be done. Let’s continue with the burrito example. Say you and your two friends need to make 100 burritos. One way to split this up would be for all of you to make 33 burritos concurrently.
What is task parallelism?
Task parallelism is splitting a task’s execution by individual tasks. This time, instead of splitting burrito work by number of burritos, one friend would make tortilla, another makes the chorizo, and one would assemble.
What is multithreaded programming?
Multithreaded programming is a subset of parallel programming in which more than one set of sequential instructions (“thread”) executesconcurrently. Multithreading is a concept that can exist either on a single core, or multiple processes. If the threads are run on a single processor, the processor rapidly switches between the threads. It’s important to point out that on a single core, rapidly switching processes isn’t atruerepresentation of multithreaded programming, but more an example of the CPU prioritizing the execution of these processes.When the threads run on multiple processors, they’re executedsimultaneously.
What is parallel programming most commonly used for?
Since parallel programming is great for decomposing complex tasks, it usually shines best when leveraging complex calculations, large datasets, or large simulations.

Here are some use cases for parallel programming:

Advanced graphics in the entertainment industry

Applied physics

Climate research

Electrical engineering

Financial and economic modeling

Molecular modeling

National defense and nuclear weaponry

Oil and gas exploration

Quantum mechanics

Why should I use parallel programming?
You can use parallel programming when you want to quickly process large amounts of data. It’s easy and can help you complete projects quickly and efficiently. While parallel programming can create[technical debt](https://www.mailgun.com/blog/dev-life/developer-designer-collaboration/#chapter-3)and be time-intensive to set up – after all, programmers need to develop efficient parallel algorithms and code – the process saves time overall. By leveraging parallel processing power, parallel programming runs a specific program across multiple compute nodes and CPU cores at the same time.

Data processing doesn’t have to be difficult, and with the help of parallel programming, you can take your to-do list to the next level.

The most significant benefit ofparallel programming is faster code execution, saving you runtime and effort. Instead of running sequential code, you’d run parallel code. These rewards are especially evident in large-scale data parallelism, as shown in our example above. Data parallelism is when we have each thread work on the same set of tasks on a subset of values. This means that each thread performs the same task on different data sets — the data itself is being parallelized, not the tasks themselves. Fewer tasks mean less time and effort, which equals more time to spend on other details and projects.

Parallel programming is not limited to data parallelism, however.We can  spread code execution across several tasks for faster execution by distributing tasks across different threads, and across different processors. By doing so, we’re also increasing a program’s natural resources for work and thus increasing its capacity. In short, we get things done faster.
Is it always a good idea to use parallel programming?
For all its virtues, speed does have its downsides. In parallel programming, the code executes non-sequentially. If an operation requires a specific order of code for the next statement to process, that operation will fail if you apply parallel programming.

Since the code is moving quickly during parallel programming, it might also create a few new bugs. The two big bugs to look out for are;data raceswhere two processes unintentionally pick up the same data and create unexpected mutations, anddeadlocks, where threads are not able to release memory properly causing them to endlessly wait on each other to finish a process.

Source:

[https://researchcomputing.princeton.edu/support/knowledge-base/parallel-code](https://researchcomputing.princeton.edu/support/knowledge-base/parallel-code)

[https://www.mailgun.com/blog/it-and-engineering/how-use-parallel-programming/#chapter-1](https://www.mailgun.com/blog/it-and-engineering/how-use-parallel-programming/#chapter-1)