Implementing Queues
We have already learned how to use linked lists, and how to use that concept in creating and managing a Stack. So, we wil take a look at the code for a Queue.

struct QNode {
int data;
QNode* next;
};

This piece should look familiar. In the linked list we called it a Node,  in the stack the example code called it a StackNode. It is simply a structure that contains our data and a pointer to the next item in the list/stack/queue.

Also - understand that the struct can contain multiple data types, it is not restricted to a single int. For example:
struct QNode {
int data;
string fName;
string lName;
float cost;
QNode* next;
};
When we use these data types we manage the first, next and last points (and any other pointers we need to manage).

et's take a quick look at the class we are going to define, and the constructor:

struct Queue {
QNode *front, *rear;

Queue()
{
front = rear = NULL;
}

We want to keep track of the front of the queue - which is where we take things off of the queue, and we want to keep track of the rear of the queue, where we put things onto the queue. Remember, the default is that these pointers are private.

The constructor simply sets both the front and the rear pointers to NULL. So, when we declare an instance of this class in our code:

int main()
{
Queue q;
the pointers are set to Null, as we have not yet allocated any memory for them.

To insert an item into the queue it is very similar to the linked list and the stack. This is the advantage of learning how to manage linked lists, they can be used in many other types of data structures.

void qInsert(int inVal) {    // Create a new LL node    QNode* temp = new QNode();      temp->data = inVal;   temp->next = NULL;   // If rear is NULL then we have a new
// empty queue  and this
// new node is both front and rear    if (rear == NULL) {       front = rear = temp;       return;    }    // Add the new node at    // the end of queue and change rear    rear->next = temp;    rear = temp;  }
The first thing we need to do is allocate memory - which is done with the new QNode() code. Then the value that is passed as an argument to the qInsert() function is assigned the the temp node, and we set the next pointer to NULL,

If rear (and head) are NULL, we know that this is a new queue, and so we simply set both the front and the rear to the newly created temp value.

OTHERWISE

we simply have to adjust the current rear->next pointer to point at the temp value, and make rear point at this new item as the new rear.

The other functionality necessary is to remove an item from the front of the queue.

void qRemove()
{

// If queue is empty, return NULL.
if (front == NULL)
return;

// Store previous front and
// move front one node ahead
QNode* temp = front;
front = front->next;

// If front becomes NULL, then
// change rear also as NULL
if (front == NULL)
rear = NULL;

delete (temp);
}
}; //this is the end of the class Queue

If front is NULL - then we know that the queue is empty and we simply return to main().

OTHERWISE

Create a temp item, set it equal to the front item, and then reset front to the current front->next. After this we again check front to see if it is NULL, if so then we set rear to NULL as well. It is required to delete the temp space we allocated earlier.

Circular Queue
Operations on Circular Queue:

qInsert(value) This function is used to insert an element into the circular queue. In a circular queue, the new element is always inserted at Rear position.Steps:
Create a new node dynamically and insert value into it.

Check if front==NULL, if it is true then front = rear = (newly created node)

If it is false then rear=(newly created node) and rear node always contains the address of the front node.

qRemove() This function is used to delete an element from the circular queue. In a queue, the element is always deleted from front position.Steps:
Check whether queue is empty or not means front == NULL.

If it is empty then display Queue is empty. If queue is not empty then step 3

Check if (front==rear) if it is true then set front = rear = NULL else move the front forward in queue, update address of front in rear node and return the element.

Here is an example of inserting and removing a few values with a circular queue

This is the same as the non-circular EXCEPT that you must update the rear->next value to point to the head when you qRemove(), and set the new rear->next when you qInsert().