In this chapter we will study graphs. Graphs are a more general structure than the trees we studied in the last chapter; in fact you can think of a tree as a special kind of graph. Graphs can be used to represent many interesting things about our world, including systems of roads, airline flights from city to city, how the Internet is connected, or even the sequence of classes you must take to complete a major in computer science. We will see in this chapter that once we have a good representation for a problem, we can use some standard graph algorithms to solve what otherwise might seem to be a very difficult problem.

While it is relatively easy for humans to look at a road map and understand the relationships between different places, a computer has no such knowledge. However, we can also think of a road map as a graph. When we do so we can have our computer do interesting things for us. If you have ever used one of the Internet map sites, you know that a computer can find the shortest, quickest, or easiest path from one place to another.

As a student of computer science you may wonder about the courses you must take in order to get a major. A graph is good way to represent the prerequisites and other interdependencies among courses.Figure 1shows another graph. This one represents the courses and the order in which they must be taken to complete a major in computer science at Luther College.

Figure 1: Prerequisites for a Computer Science Major

Vocabulary and Definitions
Now that we have looked at some examples of graphs, we will more formally define a graph and its components. We already know some of these terms from our discussion of trees.
Vertex
A vertex (also called a “node”) is a fundamental part of a graph. It can have a name, which we will call the “key.” A vertex may also have additional information. We will call this additional information the “payload.”
Edge
An edge (also called an “arc”) is another fundamental part of a graph. An edge connects two vertices to show that there is a relationship between them. Edges may be one-way or two-way. If the edges in a graph are all one-way, we say that the graph is adirected graph, or adigraph. The class prerequisites graph shown above is clearly a digraph since you must take some classes before others.
Weight
Edges may be weighted to show that there is a cost to go from one vertex to another. For example in a graph of roads that connect one city to another, the weight on the edge might represent the distance between the two cities.

With those definitions in hand we can formally define a graph. A graph can be represented by Gwhere. For the graphis a set of vertices andEEis a set of edges. Each edge is a tuple where. We can add a third component to the edge tuple to represent a weight. A subgraph sis a set of edges eand vertices vsuch thatand.

Figure  2shows another example of a simple weighted digraph. Formally we can represent this graph as the set of six vertices:

and the set of nine edges:

Figure 2: A Simple Example of a Directed Graph<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/VocabularyandDefinitions.html#id1>

The example graph inFigure 2helps illustrate two other key graph terms:
Path
A path in a graph is a sequence of vertices that are connected by edges. Formally we would define a path as  such that  for all . The unweighted path length is the number of edges in the path, specifically . The weighted path length is the sum of the weights of all the edges in the path. For example in Figure 2 the path from  to  is the sequence of vertices . The edges are .
Cycle
A cycle in a directed graph is a path that starts and ends at the same vertex. For example, inFigure 2the pathis a cycle. A graph with no cycles is called anacyclic graph. A directed graph with no cycles is called adirected acyclic graphor aDAG. We will see that we can solve several important problems if the problem can be represented as a DAG.

The Graph ADT
The graph abstract data type (ADT) is defined as follows:

Graph()creates a new, empty graph.

addVertex(vert)adds an instance ofVertexto the graph.

addEdge(fromVert,toVert)Adds a new, directed edge to the graph that connects two vertices.

addEdge(fromVert,toVert,weight)Adds a new, weighted, directed edge to the graph that connects two vertices.

getVertex(vertKey)finds the vertex in the graph namedvertKey.

getVertices()returns the list of all vertices in the graph.

inreturnsTruefor a statement of the formvertexingraph, if the given vertex is in the graph,Falseotherwise.

Adjacency Matrix
One of the easiest ways to implement a graph is to use a two-dimensional matrix. In this matrix implementation, each of the rows and columns represent a vertex in the graph. The value that is stored in the cell at the intersection of rowvvand columnwwindicates if there is an edge from vertexvvto vertexww. When two vertices are connected by an edge, we say that they areadjacent.Figure 3illustrates the adjacency matrix for the graph inFigure 2. A value in a cell represents the weight of the edge from vertexvvto vertexww.

Figure 3: An Adjacency Matrix Representation for a Graph<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/AnAdjacencyMatrix.html#id1>

The advantage of the adjacency matrix is that it is simple, and for small graphs it is easy to see which nodes are connected to other nodes. However, notice that most of the cells in the matrix are empty. Because most of the cells are empty we say that this matrix is “sparse.” A matrix is not a very efficient way to store sparse data. In fact, in C++ you must go out of your way to even create a matrix structure like the one inFigure 3.

The adjacency matrix is a good implementation for a graph when the number of edges is large. But what do we mean by large? How many edges would be needed to fill the matrix? Since there is one row and one column for every vertex in the graph, the number of edges required to fill the matrix is. A matrix is full when every vertex is connected to every other vertex. There are few real problems that approach this sort of connectivity. The problems we will look at in this chapter all involve graphs that are sparsely connected.

Adjacency List
A more space-efficient way to implement a sparsely connected graph is to use an adjacency list. In an adjacency list implementation we keep a master list of all the vertices in the Graph object and then each vertex object in the graph maintains a list of the other vertices that it is connected to. In our implementation of theVertexclass we will use a dictionary rather than a list where the dictionary keys are the vertices, and the values are the weights.Figure 4illustrates the adjacency list representation for the graph inFigure 2.

Figure 4: An Adjacency List Representation of a Graph<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/AnAdjacencyList.html#id1>

The advantage of the adjacency list implementation is that it allows us to compactly represent a sparse graph. The adjacency list also allows us to easily find all the links that are directly connected to a particular vertex.

Implementation
In our implementation of the Graph abstract data type we will create two classes,Graph, which holds the master list of vertices, andVertex, which will represent each vertex in the graph.

EachVertexuses a map to keep track of the vertices to which it is connected, and the weight of each edge. This map is calledconnectedTo. The listing below shows the code for theVertexclass. The constructor simply initializes theid, which will be an integer, and theconnectedTomap. TheaddNeighbormethod is used add a connection from this vertex to another. ThegetConnectionsmethod returns all of the vertices in the adjacency list, as represented by theconnectedToinstance variable. ThegetWeightmethod returns the weight of the edge from this vertex to the vertex passed as a parameter.

We useoperatoroverloadingso that when we print our Vertex using thecout<<function we get a list of its connections, instead of an error. This function must be initialized as afriendfunctionwithin the class definition, but is required to be defined outside of the class. This is specific tooperatoroverloadingin C++.
classVertex{public:intid;map<int,int>connectedTo;Vertex(){}Vertex(intkey){id=key;}voidaddNeighbor(intnbr,intweight=0){connectedTo[nbr]=weight;}vector<int>getConnections(){vector<int>keys;//Useofiteratortofindallkeysfor(map<int,int>::iteratorit=connectedTo.begin();it!=connectedTo.end();++it){keys.push_back(it->first);}returnkeys;}intgetId(){returnid;}intgetWeight(intnbr){returnconnectedTo[nbr];}friendostream&operator<<(ostream&,Vertex&);};ostream&operator<<(ostream&stream,Vertex&vert){vector<int>connects=vert.getConnections();for(unsignedinti=0;i<connects.size();i++){stream<<"( "<<vert.id<<" , "<<connects[i]<<" ) \n";}returnstream;}
The Graph class, shown in the next listing, contains a map that maps vertex names (int) to vertex objects (Vertex). In Figure 4 this map object is represented by the shaded gray box. Graph also provides methods for adding vertices to a graph and connecting one vertex to another. The getVertices method returns the names of all of the vertices in the graph.
class Graph {
public:
map<int, Vertex> vertList;
int numVertices;

Graph() {
numVertices = 0;
}

Vertex addVertex(int key) {
numVertices++;
Vertex newVertex = Vertex(key);
this->vertList[key] = newVertex;
return newVertex;
}

Vertex *getVertex(int n) {
for (map<int, Vertex>::iterator it = vertList.begin(); it != vertList.end(); ++it) {
if (it->first == n) {
// Forced to use pntr due to possibility of returning NULL
Vertex *vpntr = &vertList[n];
return vpntr;
} else {
return NULL;
}
}
}

bool contains(int n) {
for (map<int, Vertex>::iterator it = vertList.begin(); it != vertList.end(); ++it) {
if (it->first == n) {
return true;
}
}
return false;
}

void addEdge(int f, int t, int cost = 0) {
if (!this->contains(f)) {
cout << f << " was not found, adding!" << endl;
this->addVertex(f);
}
if (!this->contains(t)) {
cout << t << " was not found, adding!" << endl;
}
vertList[f].addNeighbor(t, cost);
}

vector<int> getVertices() {
vector<int> verts;

for (map<int, Vertex>::iterator it = vertList.begin(); it != vertList.end();  ++it) {
verts.push_back(it->first);
}
return verts;
}

friend ostream &operator<<(ostream &, Graph &);
};

ostream &operator<<(ostream &stream, Graph &grph) {
for (unsigned int i = 0; i < grph.vertList.size(); i++) {
stream << grph.vertList[i];
}

return stream;
}
Using the Graph and Vertex classes just defined, the following Python session creates the graph in Figure 2. First we create six vertices numbered 0 through 5. Then we display the vertex dictionary. Notice that for each key 0 through 5 we have created an instance of a Vertex. Next, we add the edges that connect the vertices together. Finally, a nested loop verifies that each edge in the graph is properly stored. You should check the output of the edge list at the end of this session against Figure 2.

Download and try the code >>> [Graph ADT.cpp](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/56136/files/25721880/download?verifier=FMrfs7wY0GyZyGFIaATjVaWdk2M9TWI3Fwx0xaLV&wrap=1)