Implementation
With the graph constructed we can now turn our attention to the algorithm we will use to find the shortest solution to the word ladder problem. The graph algorithm we are going to use is called the “breadth first search” algorithm.Breadth first search(BFS) is one of the easiest algorithms for searching a graph. It also serves as a prototype for several other important graph algorithms that we will study later.

Given a graphand a starting vertex, a breadth first search proceeds by exploring edges in the graph to find all the vertices infor which there is a path from. The remarkable thing about a breadth first search is that it findsallthe vertices that are a distancefrombefore it findsanyvertices that are a distance . One good way to visualize what the breadth first search algorithm does is to imagine that it is building a tree, one level of the tree at a time. A breadth first search adds all children of the starting vertex before it begins to discover any of the grandchildren.

To keep track of its progress, BFS colors each of the vertices white, gray, or black. All the vertices are initialized to white when they are constructed. A white vertex is an undiscovered vertex. When a vertex is initially discovered it is colored gray, and when BFS has completely explored a vertex it is colored black. This means that once a vertex is colored black, it has no white vertices adjacent to it. A gray node, on the other hand, may have some white vertices adjacent to it, indicating that there are still additional vertices to explore.

The breadth first search algorithm shown in the code below uses the adjacency list graph representation we developed earlier. In addition it uses aQueue, a crucial point as we will see, to decide which vertex to explore next.

In addition the BFS algorithm uses an extended version of theVertexclass. This new vertex class adds three new instance variables: distance, predecessor, and color.

BFS begins at the starting vertexsand colorsstartgray to show that it is currently being explored. Two other values, the distance and the predecessor, are initialized to 0 andNULLrespectively for the starting vertex. Finally,startis placed on aQueue. The next step is to begin to systematically explore vertices at the front of the queue. We explore each new node at the front of the queue by iterating over its adjacency list. As each node on the adjacency list is examined its color is checked. If it is white, the vertex is unexplored, and four things happen:

The new, unexplored vertexnbr, is colored gray.

The predecessor ofnbris set to the current nodecurrentVert

The distance tonbris set to the distance tocurrentVert+1

nbris added to the end of a queue. Addingnbrto the end of the queue effectively schedules this node for further exploration, but not until all the other vertices on the adjacency list ofcurrentVerthave been explored.
frompythonds.graphsimportGraph,Vertexfrompythonds.basicimportQueuedefbfs(g,start):start.setDistance(0)start.setPred(None)vertQueue=Queue()vertQueue.enqueue(start)while(vertQueue.size()>0):currentVert=vertQueue.dequeue()fornbrincurrentVert.getConnections():if(nbr.getColor()=='white'):nbr.setColor('gray')nbr.setDistance(currentVert.getDistance()+1)nbr.setPred(currentVert)vertQueue.enqueue(nbr)currentVert.setColor('black')Graphbfs(Graphg,Vertex*start){start->dist=0;start->pred=NULL;queue<Vertex*>vertQueue;vertQueue.push(start);while(vertQueue.size()>0){Vertex*currentVert=vertQueue.front();vertQueue.pop();//Foreachneighborofthecurrentvertexfor(unsignedintnbr=0;nbr<currentVert->getConnections().size();nbr++){if(g.vertList[currentVert->getConnections()[nbr]].color=='w'){g.vertList[currentVert->getConnections()[nbr]].color='g';g.vertList[currentVert->getConnections()[nbr]].dist=currentVert->dist+1;g.vertList[currentVert->getConnections()[nbr]].pred=currentVert;vertQueue.push(&g.vertList[currentVert->getConnections()[nbr]]);}}currentVert->color='b';}returng;}
Let’s look at how thebfsfunction would construct the breadth first tree corresponding to the graph inFigure 1. Starting from fool we take all nodes that are adjacent to fool and add them to the tree. The adjacent nodes include pool, foil, foul, and cool. Each of these nodes are added to the queue of new nodes to expand.Figure 3shows the state of the in-progress tree along with the queue after this step.

Figure 3: The First Step in the Breadth First Search<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/ImplementingBreadthFirstSearch.html#id1>

In the next stepbfsremoves the next node (pool) from the front of the queue and repeats the process for all of its adjacent nodes. However, whenbfsexamines the node cool, it finds that the color of cool has already been changed to gray. This indicates that there is a shorter path to cool and that cool is already on the queue for further expansion. The only new node added to the queue while examining pool is poll. The new state of the tree and queue is shown inFigure 4.

Figure 4: The Second Step in the Breadth First Search<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/ImplementingBreadthFirstSearch.html#id2>

The next vertex on the queue is foil. The only new node that foil can add to the tree is fail. Asbfscontinues to process the queue, neither of the next two nodes add anything new to the queue or the tree.Figure 5shows the tree and the queue after expanding all the vertices on the second level of the tree.

Figure 5: Breadth First Search Tree After Completing One Level<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/ImplementingBreadthFirstSearch.html#id3>

FIgure 6: Final Breadth First Search Tree<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/ImplementingBreadthFirstSearch.html#id4>

You should continue to work through the algorithm on your own so that you are comfortable with how it works.Figure 6shows the final breadth first search tree after all the vertices inFigure 3have been expanded. The amazing thing about the breadth first search solution is that we have not only solved the FOOL–SAGE problem we started out with, but we have solved many other problems along the way. We can start at any vertex in the breadth first search tree and follow the predecessor arrows back to the root to find the shortest word ladder from any word back to fool. The function below shows how to follow the predecessor links to print out the word ladder.

voidtraverse(Vertex*y){Vertex*x=y;while(x->pred){cout<<x->id<<endl;x=x->pred;}cout<<x->id<<endl;}traverse(g.getVertex('sage'))

Because of syntactic changes to C++ between C++98 and C++11, the following code will not run unless you are using C++11 to run.

Below is a completed implementation of both the Vertex and Graph classes, along with an implementation for the breadth-first search shown above.

[BFS.cpp](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/56136/files/25722154/download?verifier=uV3TTmuSAaU0SD6CLO5TudgFh7bWSvIVzFzVt0Dj&wrap=1)

Analysis
Before we continue with other graph algorithms let us analyze the run time performance of the breadth first search algorithm. The first thing to observe is that the while loop is executed, at most, one time for each vertex in the graph. You can see that this is true because a vertex must be white before it can be examined and added to the queue. This gives usfor the while loop. The for loop, which is nested inside the while is executed at most once for each edge in the graph,. The reason is that every vertex is dequeued at most once and we examine an edge from node uto node vonly when nodeuis dequeued. This gives usfor the for loop. combining the two loops gives us.

Of course doing the breadth first search is only part of the task. Following the links from the starting node to the goal node is the other part of the task. The worst case for this would be if the graph was a single long chain. In this case traversing through all of the vertices would be. The normal case is going to be some fraction ofbut we would still write.

Finally, at least for this problem, there is the time required to build the initial graph. We leave the analysis of thebuildGraphfunction as an exercise for you.