General Depth First Search (w/ Analysis)
The knight’s tour is a special case of a depth first search where the goal is to create the deepest depth first tree, without any branches. The more general depth first search is actually easier. Its goal is to search as deeply as possible, connecting as many nodes in the graph as possible and branching where necessary.

It is even possible that a depth first search will create more than one tree. When the depth first search algorithm creates a group of trees we call this adepth first forest. As with the breadth first search our depth first search makes use of predecessor links to construct the tree. In addition, the depth first search will make use of two additional instance variables in theVertexclass. The new instance variables are the discovery and finish times. The discovery time tracks the number of steps in the algorithm before a vertex is first encountered. The finish time is the number of steps in the algorithm before a vertex is colored black. As we will see after looking at the algorithm, the discovery and finish times of the nodes provide some interesting properties we can use in later algorithms.

The code for our depth first search is shown in DFS.cpp. Since the two functionsdfsand its helperdfsvisituse a variable to keep track of the time across calls todfsvisitwe chose to implement the code as methods of a class that inherits from theGraphclass. This implementation extends the graph class by adding atimeinstance variable and the two methodsdfsanddfsvisit. Looking at line 11 you will notice that thedfsmethod iterates over all of the vertices in the graph callingdfsvisiton the nodes that are white. The reason we iterate over all the nodes, rather than simply searching from a chosen starting node, is to make sure that all nodes in the graph are considered and that no vertices are left out of the depth first forest. It may look unusual to see the statementforaVertexinself, but remember that in this caseselfis an instance of theDFSGraphclass, and iterating over all the vertices in an instance of a graph is a natural thing to do.

For the next following parts of the topic, refer to this code: [DFS.cpp](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/56136/files/25721877/download?verifier=tVfcUAObsPyhU2alTLohWxwjaO7DpdkZbw5za395&wrap=1)

Although our implementation ofbfswas only interested in considering nodes for which there was a path leading back to the start, it is possible to create a breadth first forest that represents the shortest path between all pairs of nodes in the graph. We leave this as an exercise. In our next two algorithms we will see why keeping track of the depth first forest is important.

Thedfsvisitmethod starts with a single vertex calledstartVertexand explores all of the neighboring white vertices as deeply as possible. If you look carefully at the code fordfsvisitand compare it to breadth first search, what you should notice is that thedfsvisitalgorithm is almost identical tobfsexcept that on the last line of the innerforloop,dfsvisitcalls itself recursively to continue the search at a deeper level, whereasbfsadds the node to a queue for later exploration. It is interesting to note that wherebfsuses a queue,dfsvisituses a stack. You don’t see a stack in the code, but it is implicit in the recursive call todfsvisit.

The following sequence of figures illustrates the depth first search algorithm in action for a small graph. In these figures, the dotted lines indicate edges that are checked, but the node at the other end of the edge has already been added to the depth first tree. In the code this test is done by checking that the color of the other node is non-white.

The search begins at vertex A of the graph (Figure 14). Since all of the vertices are white at the beginning of the search the algorithm visits vertex A. The first step in visiting a vertex is to set the color to gray, which indicates that the vertex is being explored and the discovery time is set to 1. Since vertex A has two adjacent vertices (B, D) each of those need to be visited as well. We’ll make the arbitrary decision that we will visit the adjacent vertices in alphabetical order.

Vertex B is visited next (Figure 15), so its color is set to gray and its discovery time is set to 2. Vertex B is also adjacent to two other nodes (C, D) so we will follow the alphabetical order and visit node C next.

Visiting vertex C (Figure 16) brings us to the end of one branch of the tree. After coloring the node gray and setting its discovery time to 3, the algorithm also determines that there are no adjacent vertices to C. This means that we are done exploring node C and so we can color the vertex black, and set the finish time to 4. You can see the state of our search at this point inFigure 17.

Since vertex C was the end of one branch we now return to vertex B and continue exploring the nodes adjacent to B. The only additional vertex to explore from B is D, so we can now visit D (Figure 18) and continue our search from vertex D. Vertex D quickly leads us to vertex E (Figure 19). Vertex E has two adjacent vertices, B and F. Normally we would explore these adjacent vertices alphabetically, but since B is already colored gray the algorithm recognizes that it should not visit B since doing so would put the algorithm in a loop! So exploration continues with the next vertex in the list, namely F (Figure 20).

Vertex F has only one adjacent vertex, C, but since C is colored black there is nothing else to explore, and the algorithm has reached the end of another branch. From here on, you will see inFigure 21throughFigure 25  that the algorithm works its way back to the first node, setting finish times and coloring vertices black.

Figure 14: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-10

Figure 15: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-11

Figure 16: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-12

Figure 17: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-13

Figure 18: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-14

Figure 19: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-15

Figure 20: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-16

Figure 21: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-17

Figure 22: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-18

Figure 23: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-19

Figure 24: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-20

Figure 25: Constructing the Depth First Search Tree-21

The starting and finishing times for each node display a property called the parenthesis property. This property means that all the children of a particular node in the depth first tree have a later discovery time and an earlier finish time than their parent. Figure 26 shows the tree constructed by the depth first search algorithm.

Figure 26: The Resulting Depth First Search Tree<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/GeneralDepthFirstSearch.html#id13>

The visualization below shows the entire traversal of the example graph shown above. Nodes attached to an orange line are connected to the node attached with a brown line. This relationship is directional, and mirrors what can be observed above.

Analysis
The general running time for depth first search is as follows. The loops in dfs both run in , not counting what happens in dfsvisit, since they are executed once for each vertex in the graph. In dfsvisit the loop is executed once for each edge in the adjacency list of the current vertex. Since dfsvisit is only called recursively if the vertex is white, the loop will execute a maximum of once for every edge in the graph or . So, the total time for depth first search is .

Topological Sorting
To demonstrate that computer scientists can turn just about anything into a graph problem, let’s consider the difficult problem of stirring up a batch of pancakes. The recipe is really quite simple: 1 egg, 1 cup of pancake mix, 1 tablespoon oil, and3434cup of milk. To make pancakes you must heat the griddle, mix all the ingredients together and spoon the mix onto a hot griddle. When the pancakes start to bubble you turn them over and let them cook until they are golden brown on the bottom. Before you eat your pancakes you are going to want to heat up some syrup.Figure 27illustrates this process as a graph.

Figure 27: The Steps for Making Pancakes<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/TopologicalSorting.html#id1>

The difficult thing about making pancakes is knowing what to do first. As you can see fromFigure 27you might start by heating the griddle or by adding any of the ingredients to the pancake mix. To help us decide the precise order in which we should do each of the steps required to make our pancakes we turn to a graph algorithm called thetopological sort.

A topological sort takes a directed acyclic graph and produces a linear ordering of all its vertices such that if the graphcontains an edgethen the vertex  comes before the vertexin the ordering. Directed acyclic graphs are used in many applications to indicate the precedence of events. Making pancakes is just one example; other examples include software project schedules, precedence charts for optimizing database queries, and multiplying matrices.

The topological sort is a simple but useful adaptation of a depth first search. The algorithm for the topological sort is as follows:

Calldfs(g)for some graphg. The main reason we want to call depth first search is to compute the finish times for each of the vertices.

Store the vertices in a list in decreasing order of finish time.

Return the ordered list as the result of the topological sort.

Figure 28shows the depth first forest constructed bydfson the pancake-making graph shown inFigure 26.

Figure 28: Result of Depth First Search on the Pancake Graph<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/TopologicalSorting.html#id2>

Finally,Figure 29shows the results of applying the topological sort algorithm to our graph. Now all the ambiguity has been removed and we know exactly the order in which to perform the pancake making steps.

Figure 29: Result of Topological Sort on Directed Acyclic Graph

Strongly Connected Components
For the remainder of this chapter we will turn our attention to some extremely large graphs. The graphs we will use to study some additional algorithms are the graphs produced by the connections between hosts on the Internet and the links between web pages. We will begin with web pages.

Search engines like Google and Bing exploit the fact that the pages on the web form a very large directed graph. To transform the World Wide Web into a graph, we will treat a page as a vertex, and the hyperlinks on the page as edges connecting one vertex to another.Figure 30shows a very small part of the graph produced by following the links from one page to the next, beginning at Luther College’s Computer Science home page. Of course, this graph could be huge, so we have limited it to web sites that are no more than 10 links away from the CS home page.

Figure 30: The Graph Produced by Links from the Luther Computer Science Home Page<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Graphs/StronglyConnectedComponents.html#id1>

If you study the graph inFigure 30you might make some interesting observations. First you might notice that many of the other web sites on the graph are other Luther College web sites. Second, you might notice that there are several links to other colleges in Iowa. Third, you might notice that there are several links to other liberal arts colleges. You might conclude from this that there is some underlying structure to the web that clusters together web sites that are similar on some level.