Types of Data Structure

(Source: Singh, 2020)

Generally, when referring to the figure above, we can identify two categories of data structures, it can be: Linear or Non-Linear.

With linear data structures, the data are arranged linearly. Some examples are arrays, linked lists, stacks, and queues where data is stored sequentially.

With non-linear data structures, it is the opposite of linear data structures. some examples are trees, graphs, tables, and sets where the data stored is not arranged in a linear order.

Common operations on data structures include:

Traverse

Insertion

Deletion

Merging

Sorting

Searching

Attribution: beginnersbook.com/2018/10/data-structure-introduction/
What are Abstract Data Types (ADTs)?

Image Source: (Datta, S., baeldung.com, 2021)

Data types are used to specify or categorize the kinds of values that can be stored in a variable. Additionally, it explains the potential operations that may be performed on those data. For instance, an integer value can be stored using the integer data type. An integer can be used to perform addition, subtraction, multiplication, and modulo operations.

Abstract data type (ADT) is a concept or model of a data type. It further allows:

User to not bother with how the type is implemented.

Takes care of method implementations on a data type.

The user knows what to do without explicitly stating how.

We use various techniques and logic to implement ADTs in every programming language. Regardless of language, we can still carry out all the associated operations that are specified for that ADT. For instance, ADTs are primarily implemented using structure in C. On the other hand, they are implemented using classes in C++ or Java. However, all languages share the same operations.

Attribution: (2022). Retrieved 21 August 2021, from https://www.baeldung.com/cs/adt