Types of Analysis
To analyze the given algorithm, we need to know with which inputs the algorithm takes less time and with which inputs the algorithm takes a long time. To analyze an algorithm we need some kind of syntax, and that forms the base for asymptotic analysis/notation. There are three types of analysis:

Worst Case: Defines the input for which the algorithm takes a long time (slowest time to complete). Input is the one for which the algorithm runs the slowest.

Base Case: Defines the input for which the algorithm takes the least time (fastest time to complete). Input is the one for which the algorithm runs the fastest.

Average Case: Gives an estimate of the algorithm's execution time. Run the algorithm multiple times with a variety of inputs generated by a distribution, add the individual running times, then divide the overall running time by the number of trials. Assumes that the input is random.

Given algorithms can be represented in different cases as expressions. Example, take a function f(n) which represents an algorithm:

for the worst case

for the best case

The average case would just take the average running time (or other factor).
Asymptotic Notation
We need to determine the upper and lower bounds for each of the three scenarios, for which we have the expressions for the best, average, and worst cases. We require some form of syntax to indicate these upper and lower bounds, and this is the topic of the discussion that follows. Assume for the moment that the above algorithm is represented as a function f(n).

Big-O Notation [Upper Bounding Function]

This notation gives the tight upper bound of the given function. Generally, it is represented as f(n) = O(g(n)). That means, at larger values of n, the upper bound of f(n) is g(n). For example, if f(n) = n4 + 100n^2 + 10n + 50 is the given algorithm, then n^4 is g(n). That means g(n) gives the maximum rate of growth for f(n) at larger values of n.

Omega-Q Notation [Lower Bounding Function]

Similar to the O discussion, this notation gives the tighter lower bound of the given algorithm and we represent it as f(n) = Ω(g(n)). That means, at larger values of n, the tighter lower bound of f(n) is g(n). For example, if f(n) = 100n^2 + 10n + 50, g(n) is Ω(n^2).

Theta- Notation [Order Function]

This notation decides whether the upper and lower bounds of a given function (algorithm) are the same. The average running time of an algorithm is always between the lower bound and the upper bound. If the upper bound (O) and lower bound (Ω) give the same result, then the Θ notation will also have the same rate of growth.

Important Notes
For analysis (best case, worst case and average), we try to give the upper bound (O) and lower bound (Ω) and average running time (Θ). From the above examples, it should also be clear that, for a given function (algorithm), getting the upper bound (O) and lower bound (Ω) and average running time (Θ) may not always be possible. For example, if we are discussing the best case of an algorithm, we try to give the upper bound (O) and lower bound (Ω) and average running time (Θ).

Attribution: Karumanchi, N. (2020). Data structures and algorithms made easy. [Madinaguda, India]: CareerMonk.