To compare algorithms, we can use some objective measures as listed below and some considerations:

Execution times: Not a good measure as execution times are specific to a particular computer.

Number of statements executed: Not a good measure, since the number of statements varies with the programming language as well as the style of the individual programmer.

Ideal solution: Let us assume that we express the running time of a given algorithm as a function of the input size n (i.e., f(n)) and compare these different functions corresponding to running times. This kind of comparison is independent of machine time, programming style, etc.
What is Growth Rate?
The term "growth rate" refers to the pace at which the running time increases as a function of input.

Example 1:

Let's say you visit a store to purchase a car and a bicycle. If a buddy sees you there and inquires about your purchase, you typically reply that you are purchasing a car. This is due to the price of the car being higher than the price of the bicycle (approximating the cost of the bicycle to the cost of the car).

We can describe the cost of the car and the cost of the bicycle in terms of function for the aforementioned example, and for a given function, disregard the low order elements that are largely irrelevant (for large value of input size, n).

Example 2:

In this case, , ,  and  are the individual costs of some function and approximate to n4 since n4 is the highest rate of growth.
Commonly used Growth RatesTime ComplexityNameExampleConstantAdd an element to the front of a linked listLogarithmicFinding an element in a sorted arrayLinearFinding an element in an unsorted arrayLinear LogarithmicSorting n items by divide-and-conquerQuadraticShortest path between two nodes in a graphCubicMatrix MultiplicationExponentialThe Towers of Hanoi Problem
Attribution: Karumanchi, N. (2020). Data structures and algorithms made easy. [Madinaguda, India]: CareerMonk.