Why is it called Asymptotic Analysis?
From the discussion above (for all three notations: worst case, best case, and average case), we can easily understand that, in every case for a given function f(n) we are trying to find another function g(n) which approximates f(n) at higher values of n. That means g(n) is also a curve which approximates f(n) at higher values of n.
In mathematics we call such a curve an asymptotic curve. In other terms, g(n) is the asymptotic curve for f(n). For this reason, we call algorithm analysis asymptotic analysis.
Guidelines for Asymptotic Analysis
There are some general rules to help us determine the running time of an algorithm.

1) Loops: The running time of a loop is, at most, the running time of the statements inside the loop (including tests) multiplied by the number of iterations.
//executes n times
for(i=1; i<=n;i++)
m = m+2; //constant time, c
Total time = a constant

2) Nested loops: Analyze from the inside out. Total running time is the product of the sizes of all the loops.
//outer loop executed n times
for(i=1; i<=n; i++){
//inner loop executes n times
for(j=1; j<=n; j++)
k = k+1; //constant time
}
Total time = c × n × n = .

3) Consecutive statements: Add the time complexities of each statement.
x=x+1; //constant time
//executes n times
for(i=1; i<=n; i++)
m = m+2; //constant time
//outer loop executes n times
for(i=1; i<=n; i++){
//inner loop executed n times
for(j=1; j<=n; j++)
k=k+!; //constant time
}
Total time = .

4) If-then-else statements: Worst-case running time: the test, plus either the then part or the else part (whichever is the larger).
//test: constant
if(length() == 0){
return false; //then part: constant
}
else { //else part: (constant+constant)*n
for(int n=0; n<length(); n++){
//another if: constant + constant(no else part)
if(!list[n].equals(otherList.list[n]))
//constant
return false
}
}
Total time = .

5) Logarithmic complexity: An algorithm is O(logn) if it takes a constant time to cut the problem size by a fraction (usually by ½). As an example let us consider the following program:
for(i=1;i<n;)
i = i*2;
Total time = .

Attribution: Karumanchi, N. (2020). Data structures and algorithms made easy. [Madinaguda, India]: CareerMonk.