Simple Definition and Examples
Recursion means "defining a problem in terms of itself". This can be a very powerful tool in writing algorithms. Recursion comes directly from Mathematics, where there are many examples of expressions written in terms of themselves. For example, the Fibonacci sequence is defined as: F(i) = F(i-1) + F(i-2)

Recursion is the process of defining a problem (or the solution to a problem) in terms of (a simpler version of) itself.

For example, we can define the operation "find your way home" as:

If you are at home, stop moving.

Take one step toward home.

"find your way home".

Here the solution to finding your way home is two steps (three steps). First, we don't go home if we are already home. Secondly, we do a very simple action that makes our situation simpler to solve. Finally, we redo the entire algorithm.

The above example is called tail recursion. This is where the very last statement is calling the recursive algorithm. Tail recursion can directly be translated into loops.

Another example of recursion would be finding the maximum value in a list of numbers. The maximum value in a list is either the first number or the biggest of the remaining numbers. Here is how we would write the pseudocode of the algorithm:
Function find_max( list )

possible_max_1 = first value in list
possible_max_2 = find_max ( rest of the list );

if ( possible_max_1 > possible_max_2 )
answer is possible_max_1
else
answer is possible_max_2
end

endParts of a Recursive Algorithm
All recursive algorithms must have the following:

Base Case (i.e., when to stop) -  the solution to the "simplest" possible problem

Work toward Base Case - where we make the problem simpler.

Recursive Call (i.e., call ourselves) - use the same algorithm to solve a simpler version of the problem

The base case is the solution to the "simplest" possible problem (For example, the base case in the problem 'find the largest number in a list' would be if the list had only one number... and by definition if there is only one number, it is the largest).
Examples
What is the definition of Factorial?

Answer: factorial(X) = X * (x-1) * (x-2) * ... * 2

Hmmm, but what does "(x-1) * (x-2) * ... * 2" equal?

Answer: factorial(X-1)

What if we combine these definitions!

Answer 3: factorial(X) = X * factorial(X-1);

Lets look at a non-recursive solution:
#include <iostream>
#include <string.h>

int factorial_loop(int n){
int fact = 1;
for(int i = 0; i <= n; i++){
if(i == 0) continue; //can be removed but initialize i to 1
fact *= i;
}
return fact;
}

int main(){
std::cout << factorial_loop(5);
return 0;
}
The recursive solution:
#include <iostream>
#include <string.h>

int factorial(int n){
if(n==0) return 1;
return n*factorial(n-1);
}

int main(){
std::cout << factorial(5);
return 0;
}
Can you identify the different parts of the recursive function?

Attribution: Programming - Recursion. (2022). Retrieved from https://www.cs.utah.edu/~germain/PPS/Topics/recursion.html#:~:text=Recursion%20means%20%22defining%20a%20problem,%2B%20F(i%2D2)