A. Shell Sort
The shell sort, sometimes called the “diminishing increment sort,” improves on the insertion sort by breaking the original vector into a number of smaller subvectors, each of which is sorted using an insertion sort. The unique way that these subvectors are chosen is the key to the shell sort. Instead of breaking the vector into subvectors of contiguous items, the shell sort uses an increment i, sometimes called the gap, to create a subvector by choosing all items that are i items apart.

This can be seen in Figure 6. This vector has nine items. If we use an increment of three, there are three subvectors, each of which can be sorted by an insertion sort. After completing these sorts, we get the vector shown in Figure 7. Although this vector is not completely sorted, something very interesting has happened. By sorting the subvectors, we have moved the items closer to where they actually belong.

Figure 6: A Shell Sort with Increments of Three<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Sort/TheShellSort.html#id1>

Figure 7: A Shell Sort after Sorting Each subvector<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Sort/TheShellSort.html#id2>

Figure 8 shows a final insertion sort using an increment of one; in other words, a standard insertion sort. Note that by performing the earlier subvector sorts, we have now reduced the total number of shifting operations necessary to put the vector in its final order. For this case, we need only four more shifts to complete the process.

Figure 8: ShellSort: A Final Insertion Sort with Increment of 1<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Sort/TheShellSort.html#id3>

Figure 9: Initial Subvectors for a Shell Sort<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Sort/TheShellSort.html#id4>

We said earlier that the way in which the increments are chosen is the unique feature of the shell sort. The function shown in the code below uses a different set of increments. In this case, we begin with  subvectors. On the next pass,  subvectors are sorted. Eventually, a single vector is sorted with the basic insertion sort. Figure 9 shows the first subvectors for our example using this increment.

The following invocation of the shellSort function shows the partially sorted vectors after each increment, with the final sort being an insertion sort with an increment of one.
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

// print the sorted vector
void printl(vector<int> avector) {
for (unsigned int i=0; i<avector.size(); i++) {
cout << avector[i] << " ";
}
cout << endl;
}
// function returns sorted subvector
vector<int> gapInsertionSort(vector<int> avector, int start, int gap) {
for (unsigned int i = start + gap; i < avector.size(); i += gap) {
int currentvalue = avector[i];
int position = i;

while (position >= gap && avector[position - gap] > currentvalue) {
avector[position] = avector[position - gap];
position -= gap;
}
avector[position] = currentvalue;
}
return avector;
}

//function shellsorts through the vector
vector<int> shellSort(vector<int> avector) {
int subvectorcount = avector.size() / 2; //cuts vector by half
while (subvectorcount > 0) {
for (int startposition = 0; startposition < subvectorcount;
startposition++) {
avector = gapInsertionSort(avector, startposition, subvectorcount);/*
runs avector through gapInsertionSort function
*/
}
cout << "After increments of size " << subvectorcount
<< " The vector is: " << endl;
printl(avector);

subvectorcount = subvectorcount / 2; //cuts vector in half
}

return avector;
}

int main() {
// Vector initialized using a static array
static const int arr[] = {54, 26, 93, 17, 77, 31, 44, 55, 20};
vector<int> avector (arr, arr + sizeof(arr) / sizeof(arr[0]));

printl(shellSort(avector));

return 0;
}
At first glance you may think that a shell sort cannot be better than an insertion sort, since it does a complete insertion sort as the last step. It turns out, however, that this final insertion sort does not need to do very many comparisons (or shifts) since the list has been pre-sorted by earlier incremental insertion sorts, as described above. In other words, each pass produces a list that is “more sorted” than the previous one. This makes the final pass very efficient.

Although a general analysis of the shell sort is well beyond the scope of this text, we can say that it tends to fall somewhere between  and , based on the behavior described above.

B. Merge Sort
We now turn our attention to using a divide and conquer strategy as a way to improve the performance of sorting algorithms. The first algorithm we will study is the merge sort. Merge sort is a recursive algorithm that continually splits a vector in half. If the vector is empty or has one item, it is sorted by definition (the base case). If the vector has more than one item, we split the vector and recursively invoke a merge sort on both halves. Once the two halves are sorted, the fundamental operation, called a merge, is performed. Merging is the process of taking two smaller sorted vectors and combining them together into a single, sorted, new vector. Figure 10 shows our familiar example vector as it is being split by mergeSort. Figure 11 shows the simple vectors, now sorted, as they are merged back together.

Figure 11: vectors as They Are Merged Together<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Sort/TheMergeSort.html#id2>

ThemergeSortfunction shown inthe code belowbegins by asking the base case question. If the length of the vector is less than or equal to one, then we already have a sorted vector and no more processing is necessary. If, on the other hand, the length is greater than one, then we utilize the vector intializer using .begin to extract the left and right halves. This is similar to using the Pythonsliceoperation to extract the left and right halves. It is important to note that the vector may not have an even number of items. That does not matter, as the lengths will differ by at most one.
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

//function that prints the vector
void printl(vector<int> avector) {
for (unsigned int i=0; i<avector.size(); i++) {
cout << avector[i] << " ";
}
cout << endl;
}

//function sorts using mergesort.
vector<int> mergeSort(vector<int> avector) {
cout<<"Splitting ";
printl(avector);
if (avector.size()>1) {
int mid = avector.size()/2;
//C++ Equivalent to using Python Slices
vector<int> lefthalf(avector.begin(),avector.begin()+mid);
vector<int> righthalf(avector.begin()+mid,avector.begin()+avector.size());

lefthalf = mergeSort(lefthalf);
righthalf = mergeSort(righthalf);

unsigned i = 0;
unsigned j = 0;
unsigned k = 0;
while (i < lefthalf.size() && j < righthalf.size()) {
if (lefthalf[i] < righthalf[j]) {
avector[k]=lefthalf[i];
i++;
} else {
avector[k] = righthalf[j];
j++;
}
k++;
}

while (i<lefthalf.size()) {
avector[k] = lefthalf[i];
i++;
k++;
}

while (j<righthalf.size()) {
avector[k]=righthalf[j];
j++;
k++;
}

}
cout<<"Merging ";
printl(avector);

return avector;
}

int main() {
// Vector initialized using a static array
static const int arr[] = {54, 26, 93, 17, 77, 31, 44, 55, 20};
vector<int> avector (arr, arr + sizeof(arr) / sizeof(arr[0]) );

printl(mergeSort(avector));

return 0;
}
Once themergeSortfunction is invoked on the left half and the right half (lines 8–9), it is assumed they are sorted. The rest of the function (lines 11–31) is responsible for merging the two smaller sorted vectors into a larger sorted vector. Notice that the merge operation places the items back into the original vector (avector) one at a time by repeatedly taking the smallest item from the sorted vectors.

ThemergeSortfunction has been augmented with aprintstatement (line 2) to show the contents of the vector being sorted at the start of each invocation. There is also aprintstatement (line 32) to show the merging process. The transcript shows the result of executing the function on our example vector. Note that the vector with 44, 55, and 20 will not divide evenly. The first split gives [44] and the second gives [55,20]. It is easy to see how the splitting process eventually yields a vector that can be immediately merged with other sorted vectors.

The visualization above highlights the individual components of the algorithm itself. The arrows on the bottom indicate the left, middle, and right portions that the algorithm is currently examining. Left and right components are indicated by the color brown, while the middle is indicated by orange. Look for the “divide-and-conquer” aspect of the algorithm here.

In order to analyze themergeSortfunction, we need to consider the two distinct processes that make up its implementation. First, the vector is split into halves. We already computed (in a binary search) that we can divide a vector in halflogntimes wherenis the length of the vector. The second process is the merge. Each item in the vector will eventually be processed and placed on the sorted vector. So the merge operation which results in a vector of sizenrequiresnoperations. The result of this analysis is thatlognsplits, each of which costsnfor a total ofnlognoperations. A merge sort is anO(nlogn)algorithm.

Recall that the slicing operator isO(k)where k is the size of the slice. In order to guarantee thatmergeSortwill beO(nlogn)we will need to remove the slice operator. Again, this is possible if we simply pass the starting and ending indices along with the vector when we make the recursive call. We leave this as an exercise.

It is important to notice that themergeSortfunction requires extra space to hold the two halves as they are extracted with the slicing operations. This additional space can be a critical factor if the vector is large and can make this sort problematic when working on large data sets. In the case with using lists in python, the space complexity isO(logn).

C. Quick Sort
Thequick sortuses divide and conquer to gain the same advantages as the merge sort, while not using additional storage. As a trade-off, however, it is possible that the list may not be divided in half. When this happens, we will see that performance is diminished.

A quick sort first selects a value, which is called thepivot value. Although there are many different ways to choose the pivot value, we will simply use the first item in the list. The role of the pivot value is to assist with splitting the list. The actual position where the pivot value belongs in the final sorted list, commonly called thesplit point, will be used to divide the list for subsequent calls to the quick sort.

Figure 12 shows that 54 will serve as our first pivot value. Since we have looked at this example a few times already, we know that 54 will eventually end up in the position currently holding 31. Thepartitionprocess will happen next. It will find the split point and at the same time move other items to the appropriate side of the list, either less than or greater than the pivot value.

Figure 12: The First Pivot Value for a Quick Sort

Partitioning begins by locating two position markers—let’s call them leftmark and rightmark—at the beginning and end of the remaining items in the list (positions 1 and 8 in Figure 13). The goal of the partition process is to move items that are on the wrong side with respect to the pivot value while also converging on the split point. Figure 13 shows this process as we locate the position of 54.

Figure 13: Finding the Split Point for 54

We begin by incrementingleftmarkuntil we locate a value that is greater than the pivot value. We then decrementrightmarkuntil we find a value that is less than the pivot value. At this point we have discovered two items that are out of place with respect to the eventual split point. For our example, this occurs at 93 and 20. Now we can exchange these two items and then repeat the process again.

At the point whererightmarkbecomes less thanleftmark, we stop. The position ofrightmarkis now the split point. The pivot value can be exchanged with the contents of the split point and the pivot value is now in place (Figure 14). In addition, all the items to the left of the split point are less than the pivot value, and all the items to the right of the split point are greater than the pivot value. The list can now be divided at the split point and the quick sort can be invoked recursively on the two halves.

Figure 14: Completing the Partition Process to Find the Split Point for 54

The quickSort function shown in the code below invokes a recursive function, quickSortHelper. quickSortHelper begins with the same base case as the merge sort. If the length of the list is less than or equal to one, it is already sorted. If it is greater, then it can be partitioned and recursively sorted. The partition function implements the process described earlier. The following program sorts the list that was used in the example above.

The visualization above shows how quick sort works in action. Our pivot is represented by the arrow on screen. If an object is bigger than the pivot, it will turn blue and stay where it is. If it is smaller it will turn red and swap to the left side of the pivot. Once an object is sorted, it will turn yellow.

To analyze the quickSort function, note that for a list of length n, if the partition always occurs in the middle of the list, there will again be  divisions. In order to find the split point, each of the n items needs to be checked against the pivot value. The result is . In addition, there is no need for additional memory as in the merge sort process.

Unfortunately, in the worst case, the split points may not be in the middle and can be very skewed to the left or the right, leaving a very uneven division. In this case, sorting a list of n items divides into sorting a list of 0 items and a list of  items. Then sorting a list of  divides into a list of size 0 and a list of size , and so on. The result is an  sort with all of the overhead that recursion requires.

We mentioned earlier that there are different ways to choose the pivot value. In particular, we can attempt to alleviate some of the potential for an uneven division by using a technique called median of three. To choose the pivot value, we will consider the first, the middle, and the last element in the list. In our example, those are 54, 77, and 20. Now pick the median value, in our case 54, and use it for the pivot value (of course, that was the pivot value we used originally). The idea is that in the case where the the first item in the list does not belong toward the middle of the list, the median of three will choose a better “middle” value. This will be particularly useful when the original list is somewhat sorted to begin with.

"Problem Solving with Algorithms and Data Structures using C++" by Bradley N. Miller, David L. Ranum, and Janice L. Pearce is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.