What is (data) analytics?

Analytics is the scientific process of transforming data into insights for making better decisions.1 Three developments have spurred the explosive growth in the use of analytics for improving decision making in all facets of our lives, including business, sports, science, medicine, and government:

Incredible amounts of data are produced by technological advances such as pointof-sale scanner technology; e-commerce and social networks; sensors on all kinds of mechanical devices such as aircraft engines, automobiles, thermometers, and farm machinery enabled by the so-called Internet of Things; and personal electronic devices such as cell phones.

Ongoing research has resulted in numerous methodological developments, including advances in computational approaches to effectively handle and explore massive amounts of data as well as faster algorithms for data visualization, machine learning, optimization, and simulation.

The explosion in computing power and storage capability through better computing hardware, parallel computing, and cloud computing (the remote use of hardware and software over the internet) enable us to solve larger decision problems more quickly and more accurately than ever before.

_

1We adopt the definition of analytics developed by the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS).

Broad Categories of Analytics

Gartner Analytics Ascendancy Model (Schaap, 2020)

Descriptive analytics is the set of analytical tools that describe what has happened. This includes techniques such as data queries (requests for information with certain characteristics from a database), reports, descriptive or summary statistics, and data visualization. Descriptive data mining techniques such as cluster analysis (grouping data points with similar characteristics) also fall into this category. In general, these techniques summarize existing data or the output from predictive or prescriptive analyses.

Predictive analytics consists of techniques that use mathematical models constructed from past data to predict future events or better understand the relationships between variables. Techniques in this category include regression analysis, time series forecasting, computer simulation, and predictive data mining. As an example of a predictive model, past weather data are used to build mathematical models that forecast future weather. Likewise, past sales data can be used to predict future sales for seasonal products such as snowblowers, winter coats, and bathing suits.

Prescriptive analytics are mathematical or logical models that suggest a decision or course of action. This category includes mathematical optimization models, decision analysis, and heuristic or rule-based systems. For example, solutions to supply network optimization models provide insights into the quantities of a company’s various products that should be manufactured at each plant, how much should be shipped to each of the company’s distribution centers, and which distribution center should serve each customer to minimize cost and meet service constraints.

Data visualization is mission-critical to the success of all three types of analytics.

Data Value Chain

It is helpful to look into how data progresses as captured by the Data Value Chain (DVC). The DVC traces the journey of data through a process of transformation into actionable insight that drives business value. Each phase in the chain is self-contained and managed by separate groups of individuals with specific skills and competencies (Ligot, 2017).

The Data Value Chain

Data Source – acquiring data from source systems, public data feed

Data Repository – storing and processing the collected data to prepare it for use

Data Analysis – consumption of data stored and preparation of reports, models, algorithms

Data Application – translation of outputs of data analysis to make decisions

At the same time, DVC also highlights ethical challenges related to data:

Data Poverty – Is data available? Is it complete? Is it readily extractable?

Data Privacy – Are personally identifiable information exposed? Are the owners of the data cognizant of its use?

Data Quality – How complete is the data? Is there miscoded information? Is the data verified?

Data Ownership – Have permissions been obtained for the use of the data? Has personal data been anonymized before use?

Data Discrimination and Misuse – Are the reports truthful? Do models and algorithms fairly represent reality? Will decisions impinge on human rights or violate regulations?

Data Liabilities – Who are accountable for the outcomes of data-driven decisions? What kind of recompense is provided if damages arise from data-driven outcomes?

Analytics Process Methodology

The practice of Analytics is also defined by a specific process of inquiry and implementation. The Cross Industry Standard Process Model for Data Mining (CRISP-DM) maps out the lifecycle of an analytics project, featuring the typical phases, the tasks, and relationships between the tasks (Chapman, et al.,1999). Methodological frameworks such as CRISP-DM help define the typical Analytics work environment and has implications for skills required from practitioners.

The following are the key steps of the CRISP-DM model:

Business Understanding – this phase focuses on understanding project objectives and business requirements to convert them into analytics problem definitions and a plan designed to achieve the solution.

Data Understanding – This phase covers data collection and exploratory data analysis to uncover data quality problems, and surface preliminary insights.

Data Preparation –This phase transforms raw data into a form that will make it useful for analytical modeling, including feature selection and addressing quality issues.

Analytical Modeling – This phase is where various modeling techniques and algorithms are applied and calibrated to produce the required insights and modeling outputs.

Model evaluation – Once the analytical models are prepared, the quality of the output is reviewed (e.g. accuracy, fit) and assessed against business objectives (e.g. does the model predict the outcomes sought, do the variables describe the phenomena). Several models may be benchmarked against each other for applicability.

Model deployment – This last phase implements the model into existing business process as an intervention.

CRISP-DM Reference Model

Types of Data

Choosing the types of data visualization depends on whether your variables are continuous, categorical, or can be either.

Continuous variables are numbers, such as heights, or temperatures or revenues. You can do arithmetic on continuous variables, like adding two temperatures together. They are usually numbers, which you can process arithmetically.
Example: heights, temperature, revenue

Categorical variables are things that can be classified, and are usually written as text. They include eye color, which takes the categories blue, brown and a few others. Other examples include country and industry, which have a longer list of categories.
Example: eye colors, countries, industry

Either continuous or categorical are data that can be treated as continuous but can be processed into categories. For example, age is a number, so by default it's a continuous variable. However, many surveys use age groups like 25 to 30. Those age groups are categories. Similarly, time is naturally a continuous variable, but if you have to produce a report on how prices change each month, you might want to think of the month of the year as a categorical variable.
Example: age is continuous, but age group is category, time is continuous but month of the year is categorical.

Big data is any set of data that is too large or too complex to be handled by standard data-processing techniques using a typical desktop computer.People refer to the four Vs of big data:
volume—the amount of data generated

velocity—the speed at which the data are generated

variety—the diversity in types and structures of data generated

veracity—the reliability of the data generated