Why visualize data?

Data visualization is used to explore and explain data and to guide decision making in all areas of business and science.There are three main ways of getting insight from a dataset.

Calculating summary statistics: includes measures of quantity like mean or median, and measures of variation like standard deviation

Running models: use of statistical models like linear regression and logistic regression to model relationships between variables

Drawing plots: visualize data by drawing plots like a scatter plot or a histogram

Case Study: The Datasaurus Dataset

Albert Cairo created the Datasaurus dataset which urges people to “never trust summary statistics alone; always visualize your data.” While the data exhibits normal-seeming statistics, plotting the data reveals a picture of a dinosaur.

The Datasaurus Dozen is a collection of 13 datasets, with names like away and bullseye. Each dataset has two variables: the x and the y coordinates. "Variable" is just statistics jargon for a column of data.

If we calculate the mean of x and y values of each dataset, it's more or less the same value.

We can look at the variation of data by calculating the standard deviation. Each dataset has the same standard deviation for x and y.

Here is a scatter plot of each dataset, and even a quick glance shows what the calculations failed to. That is, every dataset is completely different. Until you physically look at the datasets, it's hard to tell that you have lines and circles and a star and a dinosaur.

This case study, demonstrate the importance of plotting and visualizing data.