Data Storytelling

Data storytelling is the best way to use data tocreate new knowledgeand new decisions or actions. It is an integrative practice that incorporates knowledge and skills from several disciplines, including communication, analysis and design. It is practiced across many fields and is used to address a variety of challenges.

Storytelling is something most marketers are somewhat familiar with. When we’re talking about data storytelling, we are talking about stories in which data is the center point. The story is meant to explain the data and why it matters.There’s all kinds of stories, and most of them visuals can help tell, but only some have this focus and intent

Storytelling through data is the process of transforming data-driven analyses into a widely-accessible visual format to influence a business decision, strategy, or action by utilizing analytical information that, ultimately, turn into actionable insights..

Audience

Who is your audience?

Who will hear the story?

What is the listener’s motivation?

What is the listener’s level of knowledge and familiarity with the business problem?

What are possible reactions?

Where is your audience?

Online

Audio only

Face-to-face

Will the presentation be shared?

When is your audience available?

What to do if someone cannot attend

Record the presentation?

Confidentiality/Security concerns

Business Value and Goal

Business value means different things to different audiences so be clear on why someone should care about the story being told

What do you want members of the audience to take away?

What is the call to action, if any?

Using Evidence

Should be critical to the end goal

If a piece of evidence does not support concluding remarks or is secondary to the primary focus, consider leaving the evidence out of the presentation.

Deductive Reasoning

Uses facts or premises to arrive at a conclusion

Considered “top-down” because it moves from a general premise to specific facts derived from the general premise

Sound deductive reasoning leads to conclusions that are true.

Example: syllogism All mammals have eyes. Humans are mammals. Therefore, humans have eyes.

Inductive Reasoning

Moves from specific to general

Create a conclusion based on observations, patterns, and hypotheses

We sample a population, study the sample, and then make inferences that we believe will be true for the entire population.

Be sure the sample represents the population to which the conclusion is being applied

Fallacies

Argument might not apply a rule of logic

Argument might leave out or misinterpret a crucial premise

Conclusion might not follow logically from the premise(s)

Formal Fallacy

One or more premises shown to be false

If milk is kept in the refrigerator, it will not spoil. The milk is spoiled. Therefore, the milk was not kept in the refrigerator.

Informal Fallacy

One or more premises do not adequately support the conclusion

Some people have psychic powers. Can you prove it? No one has been able to disprove it.