SDLC Phases
Planning

Analysis

Detailed system design

Implementation

Maintenance

This chapter has a section about each of the five phases listed above. Each of the phases from 2 to 5 can fall back to an earlier phase if there is a change in circumstances that requires the system to be reconsidered from that earlier phase. For example, if we discover in phase 4 that there was a critical error in phase 2, we move back to phase 2, correct the error, and move on from there. At any level, there must be approval from the project sponsors (typically upper management) to move ahead to the next phase after review of the completion of the current phase. Also, it is normal to completely reexamine a system after it has been used for a while, starting over at phase 1, and proceeding through the cycle to incorporate whatever changes are needed.
Planning
This phase often starts with a request for a new system. The team conducting this phase should learn about the company making the request, its data, its processes, and its existing systems. The text presents three standard alternatives that may be chosen during this phase:

Should the existing system continue to be used? Does it do the job we need it to do?

Should the existing system be changed to work better, or to incorporate the new requirements? The text points out that the system may already do what needs to be done, but it might perform better if it was amended to include some things we merely want. Our job is typically to meet the actual needs of the company, to fulfill the actual system requirements.

Should the existing system be replaced? Sometimes, this becomes a question of building a new system while maintaining the old system for its original purpose. The text reminds us again to determine what is actually needed to meet the system requirements.

The text changes to a related topic: can we actually build the system that is being requested? The text considers three perspectives that affect the answer to that question.

technical perspective - What are the hardware and software reqquirements for this system? Can it be built with current technology?

system cost perspective - Assuming the system can be built, can we afford it? Will the cost of creating/changing the system make sense in terms of money we will gain or money we will stop losing? Does it increase our profits or diminish our losses?

operational cost perspective - What will the ongoing costs be to operate and maintain this system? Operational costs may include the cost of training/retraining staff to use the new system, which should be a consideration in the design process.

In this phase we must:

analyze the data and project requirements.

We must create ERDs and normalize tables.

We must verify that our model is accurate.

We must complete a design that can used across long distances, if necessary.
Analysis
The previous phase involves a lot of interviewing, fact finding, and questioning. It leads to this phase in which logical technical requirements for the system must be determined. We must determine what the system has to do first, then we must build a model/plan for a system that would meet those requirements. In the process of developing that model, we translate the system requirements into technical terms. What are the inputs? What are the outputs? What processing must be done to create those outputs?

Creation of the logical design includes making data flow diagrams (DFDs), hierarchical input process output diagrams (HIPOs), entity relationship diagrams (ERDs), and normalized tables for databases.

Detailed Systems Design

The analyst completing the design establishes the requirements for software functionality, for menus and reports, for devices that must be allowed to attach to the system, and for any other technical capabilities the system must have. A migration plan to move from the old system to the new system is created, and training plans for users and for staff who will maintain the system are created.

Implementation

Hardware and software are installed, tested, and demonstrated to the new users and owners. During the installation, the old data is converted for use in the new system (if necessary and possible) or the old system remains available to provide access to the old data (if needed).

Maintenance

The new system is maintained by its new administrators/owners who assess its performance at regular intervals.