The text presents another spin on development, theDatabase Life Cycle, in which an SDLC is rewritten as aDBLC:

DBLC Phases

Database Initial Study

Database Design

Implementation and Loading

Testing and Evaluation

Operation

Maintenance and Evolution

As you can see, there is a lot similarity from one system to the other.
Database Initial Study
The text lists some step in this phase that are just as appropriate to the SDLC. The company and its problems are examined, constraints and objectives are defined, and scope and boundaries of the project are determined. In any project, you must know what must be done, what cannot be changed, and what the limits of the project's authority will be.
Database Design
The analysts working on the project design the pieces that will make this database system work: its tables, its relationships, its keys, its reports, and its functions. The text warns us that a database project cannot be designed like a sequential program. It is more like an event driven program that must provide whatever its users want next. The code written for the system may have a great deal of iteration in it, but it must also provide an interface that allow the users and administrators to select which functions they need to run.

The text also warns us about something else that is true of database projects and most IT projects. The business expert staff providing the analysts with their business rules and processes see the system from their own point of view, which is often a human interaction view or a view based on their own job. The analyst receiving this data must turn it into a system view that can be used to specify hardware, software, and human interfaces in the language of IT. It is as if the analyst between the business experts and the designers must see the entire elephant, because the analyst must be able to describe the part that interests the person ateachend of the elephant, armed only with the data given to him/her by a person at theotherend of the elephant. Only, you aren't sure if its an elephant, a horse, or something you have never seen before. Do you have a little more respect for that person in the middle now?

In this phase we must:

Analyze the data and project requirements.

We must create ERDs and normalize tables.

We must verify that our model is accurate.

We must complete a design that can used across long distances, if necessary.
Implementation and Loading
The structure of the relations should be known, and sources of data identified, so someone has to build the database and load data. Like most software, the database can be created in a virtual machine, which gives you an advantage regarding backups. Most virtual machines can generate incremental snapshots of themselves, allowing an administrator to examine what the system looked like at various points in its history.

The text describes creation of a database in several steps, using DB2 as its example system.

Note thatbeforecreating anyfileobjects, the system administrator had to createstorage areasthat would hold files and their data by creating astorage group. This is a required step in some database systems.

Inside the storage group, the system administrator creates adatabase space, giving the database a name. Adatabase administrator IDis created as well, and it is assignedrightsto the database space.

Thedatabase administrator(DBA) logs in to the system.

Inside the database space, the database administrator creates one or moretable spaces, each of which can holdtables. Tables are created and populated.

TheDBAalso createsuser IDsand assignsrightstotable spaces and tables.

Integrity constraintsare added to the tables, and other programming as needed.

Someone addsinitial datato the tables, then the database can be tested.
Testing and Evaluation
Each of the features of the database should betested, to make sure that it works as desired. The text provides a list of features that should exist in the system, and whose functions should be tested at this time.

Physical security

Password security

Access rights

Audit trails

Data encryption

Compatibility with diskless workstations, if needed. An example would be a kiosk station in a store that allows a customer to check product prices or availability.

Ongoing testing of the system will be needed as your tables grow. Indexing tables may be useful when searching them takes too long.

The text mentions setting a regular schedule forbackups. It describes three methods that can be all be used at different intervals to make a more recoverable system than any of the methods would provide is used alone.

full backup- This is just like it sounds, a backup of all the database objects and files.

differential backup- This is used more frequently than a fuull backup. It only copies items that have changed since the last full backup. In case of data loss, you wouldrestorethemost recent fullbackup, then restore themost recent differentialbackup to catch up to changes since that full backup was made.

transaction log backup- In some systems, changes made to the ddatabase arenotimmediate. Changes may be stored in a transaction log, with each change being tagged with the time it was done. Changes in this log are made part of the database at regular intervals, which may be at the end of a business day, or more frequently for more dynamic data. If your system has this feature, complete restoration requires that a backup of this file be processed against the database, butonlyif the transaction log contains changes that do not appear in the most recent differential backup.

Table 9.1 reminds us that software can be attacked, hardware can fail, transactions can be lost to deadlocks, and the unexpected will eventually happen. Backups and restores should be scheduled and practices. Adeadlock, by the way, is a condition that occurs when two transactions each lock a record they are updating, but their updates also require a change to the record that theothertransaction has already locked. This prevents either transaction from completing unless the system is programmed to drop one of the transactions so it can process the other one.
Operation
Some problems will not show up in testing. Some will only show up once there are a critical number of users on the system, performing enough transactions to stress the system to an unexpected limit. If the system cannot keep up, hardware and software design must be reconsidered. Perhaps a cluster of servers will be needed, featuring load balancing as the system bogs down. Changes will be requested regardless of the quality of operation, leading to the next phase.
Maintenance and Evolution
Once the system is running, there will be requests for changes. There will be requests for corrections to data and to features, new tables and reports, and reexamination of security. These are common requests that someone who is maintaining the system Changes should be submitted through a process that will examine them, then reject them or schedule development and application of a solution.