Introduction to Data Analysis
Data analysis is a highly iterative process involving collection, preparation (wrangling), exploratory data analysis (EDA), and drawing conclusions. During an analysis, we will frequently revisit each of these steps. The following diagram depicts a generalized workflow:

Data Collection
Data collection is the natural first step for any data analysis—we can't analyze data we don't have. In reality, our analysis can begin even before we have the data: when we decide what we want to investigate or analyze, we have to think of what kind of data we can collect that will be useful for our analysis. While data can come from anywhere, we will explore the following sources:

Web scraping to extract data from a website's HTML

Application Program Interfaces (APIs) for web services

Databases

Internet resources

Log Files

We are surrounded by data, so the possibilities are limitless. It is important, however, to make sure that we are collecting data that will help us draw conclusions. For example, if we are trying to determine if hot chocolate sales are higher when the temperature is lower, we should collect data on the amount of hot chocolate sold and the temperatures each day. While it might be interesting to see how far people traveled to get the hot chocolate, it's not relevant to our analysis.
Data Wrangling
Data wrangling is the process of preparing the data and getting it into a format that can be used for analysis. The unfortunate reality of data is that it is often dirty, meaning that it requires cleaning (preparation) before it can be used. The following are some issues we may encounter with our data:

Human errors: Data is recorded (or even collected) incorrectly, such as putting 100 instead of 1000, or typos. In addition, there may be multiple versions of the same entry recorded, such as New York City, NYC, and nyc.

Computer error: Perhaps we weren't recording entries for a while (missing data).

Unexpected values: Maybe whoever was recording the data decided to use ? for a missing value in a numeric column, so now all the entries in the column will be treated as text instead of numeric values

Incomplete information: Think of a survey with optional questions; not everyone will answer them, so we have missing data, but not due to computer or human error.

Resolution: The data may have been collected per second, while we need hourly data for our analysis

Relevance of the fields: Often, data is collected or generated as a product of some process rather than explicitly for our analysis. In order to get it to a usable state, we will have to clean it up

Format of the data: The data may be recorded in a format that isn't conducive to analysis, which will require that we reshape it

Misconfigurations in data-recording process: Data coming from sources such as misconfigured trackers and/or webhooks may be missing fields or passing them in the wrong order.

Most of these data quality issues can be remedied, but some cannot, such as when the data is collected daily and we need it on an hourly resolution. It is our responsibility to carefully examine our data and to handle any issues, so that our analysis doesn't get distorted.
Exploratory Data Analysis
During EDA, we use visualizations and summary statistics to get a better understanding of the data. Since the human brain excels at picking out visual patterns, data visualization is essential to any analysis. In fact, some characteristics of tthe data can only be observed in a plot. Depending on our data, we may create plots to see how a variable of interest has evolved over time, compare how many observations belong to each category, find outliers, look at distributions of continuous and discrete variables, and much more.

In the workflow diagram we saw earlier, EDA and data wrangling shared a box. This is because they are closely tied:

Data needs to be prepped before EDA.

Visualizations that are created during EDA may indicate the need for additional data cleaning.

Data wrangling uses summary statistics to look for potential data issues, while EDA uses them to understand the data. Improper cleaning will distort the findings when we're conducting EDA. In addition, data wrangling skills will be required to get summary statistics across subsets of the data.
Drawing Conclusions
After we have collected the data for our analysis, cleaned it up, and performed some thorough EDA, it is time to draw conclusions. This is where we summarize our findings from EDA and decide the next steps:

Did we notice any patterns or relationships when visualizing the data?

Does it look like we can make accurate predictions from our data?

Does it make sense to move to modeling the data?

Do we need to collect new data points?

How is the data distributed?

Does the data help us answer the questions we have or give insight into the problem we are investigating?

Do we need to collect new or additional data?