Sampling
Recall that statistical inference permits us to draw conclusions about a population based on a sample. Sampling (i.e. selecting a sub-set of a whole population) is often done for reasons of cost (it’s less expensive to sample 1,000 television viewers than 100 million TV viewers) and practicality (e.g. performing a crash test on every automobile produced is impractical). In any case, the sampled population and the target population should be similar to one another.
Sampling Plan
A sampling plan is just a method or procedure for specifying how a sample will be taken from a population. We will focus our attention on these three methods:

Simple Random Sampling,

Stratified Random Sampling, and

Cluster Sampling.

Simple Random Sampling
A simple random sample is a sample selected in such a way that every possible sample of the same size is equally likely to be chosen. Drawing three names from a hat containing all the names of the students in the class is an example of a simple random sample: any group of three names is as equally likely as picking any other group of three names.

Example:

A governmentincometaxauditormustchoose a sample of 40 (usually denoted by n) of 1,000 (usually denoted by N) returns to audit.

Stratified Random Sampling
A stratified random sample is obtained by separating the population into mutually exclusive sets, or strata, and then drawing simple random samples from each stratum.

After the population has been stratified, we can use simple random sampling to generate the complete sample:

Cluster Sampling
A cluster sample is a simple random sample of groups or clusters of elements (vs. a simple random sample of individual objects). This method is useful when it is difficult or costly to develop a complete list of the population members or when the population elements are widely dispersed geographically.

Cluster sampling may increase sampling error due to similarities among cluster members.
Sample Size
This is an important issue. Numerical techniques for determining sample sizes will be described later, but suffice it to say that the larger the sample size is, the more accurate we can expect the sample estimates to be.

Two major types of error can arise when a sample of observations is taken from a population: sampling error and non-sampling error. Sampling error refers to differences between the sample and the population that exist only because of the observations that happened to be selected for the sample. Non-sampling errors are more serious and are due to mistakes made in the acquisition of data or due to the sample observations being selected improperly.

Sampling error refers to differences between the sample and the population that exist only because of the observations that happened to be selected for the sample. Another way to look at this is: the differences in results for different samples (of the same size) is due to sampling error:

E.g. Two samples of size 10 of 1,000 households. If we happened to get the highest income level data points in our first sample and all the lowest income levels in the second, this is a consequence of sampling error.

Increasing the sample size will reduce this type of error.

Non-sampling error are more serious and are due to mistakes made in the acquisition of data or due to the sample observations being selected improperly. There are three types of non-sampling errors:

Errors in data acquisition,

Nonresponse errors, and

Selection bias.

Increasing the sample size will not reduce this type of error.
Errors in Data Acquisition
Arises from the recording of incorrect responses, due to:

incorrect measurements being taken because of faulty equipment,

mistakesmadeduringtranscription from primary sources,

inaccurate recording of data due to misinterpretation of terms, or

inaccurate responses to questions concerning sensitive issues.
Nonresponse Error
Refers to error (or bias) introduced when responses are not obtained from some members of the sample, i.e. the sample observations that are collected may not be representative of the target population.

As mentioned earlier, the Response Rate (i.e. the proportion of all people selected who complete the survey) is a key survey parameter and helps in the understanding in the validity of the survey and sources of nonresponse error.
Selection Bias
Occurs when the sampling plan is such that some members of the target population cannot possibly be selected for inclusion in the sample.

Source: Data Collection and Sampling (OPRE 6301)