If you work with datasets long enough, you will eventually need to deal with statistics. Ask the average person what statistics are, and they’ll probably throw around words like “numbers,” “figures,” and “research.”

Statistics is the science, or a branch of mathematics, that involves collecting, classifying, analyzing, interpreting, and presenting numerical facts and data. It is especially handy when dealing with populations too numerous and extensive for specific, detailed measurements. Statistics are crucial for drawing general conclusions relating to a dataset from a data sample.

Statistics further breaks down into two types: descriptive and inferential. Today, we look at descriptive statistics, including a definition, the types of descriptive statistics, and the differences between descriptive statistics and inferential statistics.
Descriptive Statistics Defined
Descriptive statistics describe, show, and summarize the basic features of a dataset found in a given study, presented in a summary that describes the[data](https://www.simplilearn.com/what-is-data-article)sample and its measurements. It helps analysts to understand the data better.

Descriptive statistics represent the available data sample and do not include theories, inferences, probabilities, or conclusions. That’s a job for inferential statistics.
Descriptive Statistics Examples
If you want a good example of descriptive statistics, look no further than a student’s grade point average (GPA). A GPA gathers the data points created through a large selection of grades, classes, and exams then average them together and presents a general idea of the student’s mean academic performance. Note that the GPA doesn’t predict future performance or present any conclusions. Instead, it provides a straightforward summary of students’ academic success based on values pulled from data.

Here’s an even simpler example. Let’s assume a data set of 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 equals a sum of 20. The data set’s mean is 4, arrived at by dividing the sum by the number of values (20 divided by 5 equals 4).

[Analysts](https://www.simplilearn.com/what-does-a-data-analyst-do-article)often use charts and graphs to present descriptive statistics. If you stood outside of a movie theater, asked 50 members of the audience if they liked the film they saw, then put your findings on a pie chart, that would be descriptive statistics. In this example, descriptive statistics measure the number of yes and no answers and show how many people in this specific theater liked or disliked the movie. If you tried to come up with any other conclusions, you would be wandering into inferential statistics territory, but we'll later cover that issue.

Finally, political polling is considered a descriptive statistic, provided it’s just presenting concrete facts (the respondents’ answers), without drawing any conclusions. Polls are relatively straightforward: “Who did you vote for President in the recent election?”
Types of Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics break down into several types, characteristics, or measures. Some authors say that there are two types. Others say three or even four.
Distribution (Also Called Frequency Distribution)
Datasets consist of a distribution of scores or values. Statisticians use graphs and tables to summarize the frequency of every possible value of a variable, rendered in percentages or numbers. For instance, if you held a poll to determine people’s favorite Beatle, you’d set up one column with all possible variables (John, Paul, George, and Ringo), and another with the number of votes.

Statisticians depict frequency distributions as either a graph or as a table.
Measures of Central Tendency
Measures of central tendency estimate a dataset's average or center, finding the result using three methods: mean, mode, and median.

Mean: The mean is also known as “M” and is the most common method for finding averages. You get the mean by adding all the response values together, and dividing the sum by the number of responses, or “N.” For instance, say someone is trying to figure out how many hours a day they sleep in a week. So, the data set would be the hour entries (e.g., 6,8,7,10,8,4,9), and the sum of those values is 52. There are seven responses, so N=7. You divide the value sum of 52 by N, or 7, to find M, which in this instance is 7.3.

Mode: The mode is just the most frequent response value.[Datasets](https://www.simplilearn.com/sas-data-set-article)may have any number of modes, including “zero.” You can find the mode by arranging your dataset's order from the lowest to highest value and then looking for the most common response. So, in using our sleep study from the last part: 4,6,7,8,8,9,10. As you can see, the mode is eight.

Median: Finally, we have the median, defined as the value in the precise center of the dataset. Arrange the values in ascending order (like we did for the mode) and look for the number in the set’s middle. In this case, the median is eight.
Variability (Also Called Dispersion)
The measure of variability gives the statistician an idea of how spread out the responses are. The spread has three aspects — range,[standard deviation](https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/statistics-tutorial/what-is-normal-distribution), and variance.

Range: Use range to determine how far apart the most extreme values are. Start by subtracting the dataset’s lowest value from its highest value. Once again, we turn to our sleep study: 4,6,7,8,8,9,10. We subtract four (the lowest) from ten (the highest) and get six. There’s your range.

Standard Deviation: This aspect takes a little more work. The standard deviation (s) is your dataset’s average amount of variability, showing you how far each score lies from the mean. The larger your standard deviation, the greater your dataset’s variable. Follow these six steps:

List the scores and their means.

Find the deviation by subtracting the mean from each score.

Square each deviation.

Total up all the squared deviations.

Divide the sum of the squared deviations by N-1.

Find the result’s square root.

Source: https://www.simplilearn.com/what-is-descriptive-statistics-article