Inferential Statistics
Inferential statistics is a branch of statistics that makes the use of various analytical tools to draw inferences about the population data from sample data. Apart from inferential statistics, descriptive statistics forms another branch of statistics. Inferential statistics help to draw conclusions about the population while descriptive statistics summarizes the features of the data set.

There are two main types of inferential statistics - hypothesis testing and regression analysis. The samples chosen in inferential statistics need to be representative of the entire population. In this article, we will learn more about inferential statistics, its types, examples, and see the important formulas.

What is Inferential Statistics?

Inferential statistics helps to develop a good understanding of the population data by analyzing the samples obtained from it. It helps in making generalizations about the population by using various analytical tests and tools. In order to pick out random samples that will represent the population accurately many sampling techniques are used. Some of the important methods are simple random sampling, stratified sampling, cluster sampling, and systematic sampling techniques.
Inferential Statistics Definition
Inferential statistics can be defined as a field of statistics that uses analytical tools for drawing conclusions about a population by examining random samples. The goal of inferential statistics is to make generalizations about a population. In inferential statistics, a statistic is taken from the sample data (e.g., the sample mean) that used to make inferences about the population parameter (e.g., the population mean).

Types of Inferential Statistics

Inferential statistics can be classified into hypothesis testing and regression analysis. Hypothesis testing also includes the use of confidence intervals to test the parameters of a population. Given below are the different types of inferential statistics.

Source: https://www.cuemath.com/data/inferential-statistics/