Why Databases?
In today’s world, data is ubiquitous (abundant, global, everywhere) and pervasive (unescapable, prevalent, persistent). From birth to death, we generate and consume data. The trail of data starts with the birth certifcate and continues all the way to a death certifcate (and beyond!). In between, each individual produces and consumes enormous amounts of data.

Consider the life of Suzan in her interaction with a number of databases in a single day.

Can you imagine what services would not have been available today if there were no databases?

Databases are involved in almost all facets and activities of our daily lives: from school, to work, to medical care, government, non-proft organizations, and houses of worship.

Databases,  are specialized structures that allow computer-based systems to store, manage, and retrieve data very quickly.

Databases are the best way to store and manage data. Databases make data persistent and shareable in a secure way.

Database System Applications

Database systems are widely used. Here are some representative applications:

Enterprise Information
Sales: For customer, product, and purchase information.

Accounting: For payments, receipts, account balances, assets and other
accounting information.

Human resources: For information about employees, salaries, payroll taxes,
and benefits, and for generation of paychecks.

Manufacturing: For management of the supply chain and for tracking production of items in factories, inventories of items in warehouses and stores,
and orders for items .

Online retailers: For sales data noted above plus online order tracking,
generation of recommendation lists, and maintenance of online product
evaluations.

Banking and Finance
Banking: For customer information, accounts, loans, and banking transactions.

Credit card transactions: For purchases on credit cards and generation of
monthly statements.

Finance: For storing information about holdings, sales, and purchases of
financial instruments such as stocks and bonds; also for storing real-time
market data to enable online trading by customers and automated trading
by the firm.

Universities:  For student information, course registrations, and grades (in
addition to standard enterprise information such as human resources and
accounting).

Airlines: For reservations and schedule information. Airlines were among the
first to use databases in a geographically distributed manner.

Telecommunication: For keeping records of calls made, generating monthly
bills, maintaining balances on prepaid calling cards, and storing information
about the communication networks.