A database is a shared, integrated computer structure that stores a collection of the following:

End-user data—that is, raw facts of interest to the end user.

Metadata, or data about data, through which the end-user data is integrated and managed.

A database management system (DBMS) is a collection of programs that manages the database structure and controls access to the data stored in the database.

In a sense, a database resembles a very well-organized electronic fling cabinet in which powerful
software (the DBMS) helps manage the cabinet’s contents.

The DBMS serves as the intermediary between the user and the database. The database structure itself is stored as a collection of files, and the only way to access the data in those files is through the DBMS.

The DBMS receives all application requests and translates them into the complex operations required to fulfll those requests.

The DBMS hides much of the database’s internal complexity from the application programs and users.

The application program might be written by a programmer using a programming language, such as Visual Basic, .NET, Java, C#, or Python, or it might be created through a DBMS utility program.

Figure 1.3 shows the relationships between the end users, the application program, the DBMS and the DB itself.

Advantages of a DBMS

Improved data sharing - The DBMS helps create an environment in which end users have better access to more and better-managed data.

Improved data security - The more users access the data, the greater the risks of data security breaches. A DBMS provides a framework for better enforcement of data privacy and security policies.

Better data integration- Wider access to well-managed data promotes an integrated view of the organization’s operations and a clearer view of the big picture.

Minimized data inconsistency - Data inconsistency exists when different versions of the same data appears in different places.

Improved data access - The DBMS makes it possible to produce quick answers to ad hoc queries. From a database perspective, a query is a specific request issued to the DBMS for data manipulation—for example, to read or update the data.

Improved decision making - Better-managed data and improved data access make it possible to generate better -quality information, on which better decisions are based.

Increased end-user productivity - The availability of data, combined with the tools that transform data into usable information, empowers end users to make quick, informed decisions that can make the difference between success and failure in the global economy.

Those are just some of the advantages. You will realize the technical advantages of databases through the duration of the course.

Functions of a Database Management System

A DBMS performs several important functions that guarantee the integrity and consistency of the data in the database. Most of those functions are transparent to end users, and most can be achieved only through the use of a DBMS.

Data dictionary management -The DBMS stores defnitions of the data elements and their relationships (metadata) in a data dictionary. In turn, all programs thataccess the data in the database work through the DBMS. The DBMS uses the datadictionary to look up the required data component structures and relationships, thus relieving you from having to code such complex relationships in each program.

Data storage management - The DBMS creates and manages the complex structures required for data storage, thus relieving you from the difficult task of defining and programming the physical data characteristics. A modern DBMS provides storage not only for the data but for related data-entry forms or screen definitions, report definitions, data validation rules, procedural code, structures to handle video and picture formats, and so on.

Data transformation and presentation - The DBMS transforms entered data to conform to required data structures. The DBMS relieves you of the chore of distinguishing between the logical data format and the physical data format. That is, the DBMS formats the physically retrieved data to make it conform to the user’s logical expectations.

Security management -The DBMS creates a security system that enforces user security and data privacy. Security rules determine which users can access the database, which data items each user can access, and which data operations (read, add, delete, or modify) the user can perform. Tis is especially important in multiuser database systems.

Multiuser access control - To provide data integrity and data consistency, the DBMS uses sophisticated algorithms to ensure that multiple users can access the database concurrently without compromising its integrity.

Backup and recovery management - The DBMS provides backup and data recovery to ensure data safety and integrity. Current DBMS systems provide special utilities that allow the DBA to perform routine and special backup and restore procedures.

Data integrity management - The DBMS promotes and enforces integrity rules, thus minimizing data redundancy and maximizing data consistency. Te data relationships stored in the data dictionary are used to enforce data integrity.

Database access languages and application programming interfaces - The DBMS provides data access through a query language. A query language is a nonprocedural language—one that lets the user specify what must be done without having to specify how. Structured Query Language (SQL) is the de facto query language and data access standard supported by the majority of DBMS vendors.

Database communication interfaces - A current-generation DBMS accepts end-user requests via multiple, diﬀerent network environments. For example, the DBMS might provide access to the database via the Internet through the use of web browsers such as Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, or Microsof Internet Explorer.In this environment, communications can be accomplished in several ways:
– End users can generate answers to queries by flling in screen forms through their
preferred web browser.
– The DBMS can automatically publish predefned reports on a website.
– The DBMS can connect to third-party systems to distribute information via email
or other productivity applications.