A DBMS can be used to build many diﬀerent types of databases. Each database stores a particular collection of data and is used for a specifc purpose. Over the years, as technology and innovative uses of databases have evolved, diﬀerent methods have been used to classify databases.

For example, databases can be classifed by the number of users supported, where the data is located, the type of data stored, the intended data usage, and the degree to which the data is structured.

The table below shows the different types of databases and the commonly known Database Management Systems that provide support for each type.

Table 1-1  Types of databases

According to the number of users

The number of users determines whether the database is classifed as single user or
multiuser.

Single-user database - supports only one user at a time. In other words, if
user A is using the database, users B and C must wait until user A is done.

Multiuser databasesupports multiple users at the same time. When the multiuser database supports a relatively small number of users (usually fewer than 50) or a specifc department within an organization, it is called a workgroup database. When the database is used by the entire organization and supports many users (more than 50, usually hundreds) across many departments, the database is known as an enterprise database.

Based on Location

Location might also be used to classify the database.

Centralized Database -  A database that supports data located at a single site.

Distributed Database - A database that supports data distributed across several diﬀerent sites.

Both centralized and decentralized (distributed) databases require a well-defined infrastructure (hardware, operating systems, network technologies, etc.) to implement and operate the database. Typically, the infrastructure is owned and maintained by the organization that creates and operates the database. But in recent years, the use of cloud databases has been growing in popularity. A cloud database is a database that is created and maintained using cloud data services, such as Microsof Azure or Amazon AWS. These databases are deployed in key data centers located in different parts of the world and owners connect/communicate with and manage these databases through secured remote connection via the internet.

According to the type of data

In some contexts, such as research environments, a popular way of classifying databases is according to the type of data stored in them.

General-purpose databases -  contain a wide variety of data used in multiple disciplines—for example, a census database that contains general demographic data and the LexisNexis and ProQuest databases that contain newspaper, magazine, and journal articles for a variety of topics.

Discipline-specific databases - contain data focused on specifc subject areas. The data in this type of database is used mainly for academic or research purposes within a small set of disciplines. Examples of discipline-specifc databases include financial data stored in databases such as CompuStat or CRSP
(Center for Research in Security Prices), geographic information system (GIS) databases that store geospatial and other related data, and medical databases that store confidential medical history data.

Based on intended data usage

The most popular way of classifying databases today, however, is based on how they will be used and on the time sensitivity of the information gathered from them. For example, transactions such as product or service sales, payments, and supply purchases reflect critical day-to-day operations. Such transactions must be recorded accurately and immediately.

Operational Database / transactionalDatabase /  online transaction processing (OLTP) Database  / production Database - A database that is designed primarily to support a company’s day-to-day operations.

Analytical Database - focuses primarily on storing historical data and business metrics used exclusively for tactical or strategic decision making. Such analysis typically requires extensive “data massaging” (data manipulation) to produce information on which to base pricing decisions, sales forecasts, market strategies, and so on. Analytical databases allow the end user to perform advanced analysis of business data using sophisticated tools.

According to the degree with which data is structured

Unstructured data - is data that exists in its original (raw) state—that is, in the format
in which it was collected.

Structued data - is the result of formatting unstructured data to facilitate storage, use, and the generation of information. You apply structure (format) based on the type of processing that you intend to perform on the data. Some data might not be ready (unstructured) for some types of processing, but they might be ready (structured) for other types of processing.

Semi-structured data- has already been processed to some extent. For example, if you look at a typical webpage, the data is presented in a prearranged format to convey some information. Te database types mentioned thus far focus on the storage and management of highly structured data.

Corporations are not limited to the use of structured data. They also use semistructured and unstructured data. Just think of the valuable information that can be found on company emails, memos, and documents such as procedures, rules, and webpages.  Unstructured and semistructured data storage and management
needs are being addressed through a new generation of databases known as XML databases. Extensible Markup Language(XML) is a special language used to represent and manipulate data elements in a textual format. An XML database supports the storage and management of semistructured XML data.

Another famous semi-structured data format being used with databases is called JSON (JavaScript Object Notation)  makes use of key value pairs unlike XML which uses HTML like tags to group certain data. JSON objects can be treated like Python dictionaries. JSON is widely used in displaying data to webpages and in Non-relational Databases or NoSQL databases.

The Rise of Big Data and NoSQL

With the emergence of the World Wide Web and Internet-based technologies as the basis for the new “social media” generation, great amounts of data are being stored and analyzed. Social media refers to web and mobile technologies that enable “anywhere, anytime, always on” human interactions. Websites such as Google, Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn capture vast amounts of data about end users and consumers. This data grows exponentially and requires the use of specialized database systems. For example, as of 2015, over 500 million tweets were posted every day on Twitter, and that number continues to grow. As a result, the MySQL database Twitter was using to store user content was frequently overloaded by demand. Facebook faces similar challenges. With over 500 terabytes of data coming in each day, it stores over 100 petabytes of data in a single data storage file system. From this data, its database scans over 200 terabytes of data each hour to process user actions, including status updates, picture requests, and billions of “Like” actions. Over the past few years,
this new breed of specialized database has grown in sophistication and widespread usage.

Currently, this new type of database is known as a NoSQL database. The term NoSQL (Not only SQL) is generally used to describe a new generation of database management systems that is not based on the traditional relational database model.

NoSQL databases are designed to handle the unprecedented volume of data, variety of data types and structures, and velocity of data operations that are characteristic of these new business requirements.