A problem that has evolved with the use of personal productivity tools such as spreadsheets and desktop database programs is that users typically lack proper data-modeling and database design skills. People naturally have a “narrow” view of the data in their environment.

For example, consider a student’s class schedule. The schedule probably contains the student’s identifcation number and name, class code, class description, class credit hours, class instructor name, class meeting days and times, and class room number. In the mind of the student, these various data items compose a single unit. If a student organization wanted to keep a record of the schedules of its members, an end user might make a spreadsheet to store the schedule information. Even if the student makes a foray into the realm of desktop databases, he or she is likely to create a structure composed of a single table that mimics his or her view of the schedule data.

Translating this type of narrow view of data into a single two-dimensional table structure is a poor database design choice.

Database design refers to the activities that focus on the design of the database structure that will be used to store and manage end-user data. A database that meets all user requirements does not just happen; its structure must be designed carefully. In fact, database design is such a crucial aspect of working with databases that most of this book is dedicated to the development of good database design techniques. Even a good DBMS will perform poorly with a badly designed database.

Data is one of an organization’s most valuable assets. Data on customers, employees, orders, and receipts is all vital to the existence of a company. Tracking key growth and performance indicators are also vital to strategic and tactical plans to ensure future success; therefore, an organization’s data must not be handled lightly or carelessly. Thorough planning to ensure that data is properly used and leveraged to give the company the most benefit is just as important as proper fnancial planning to ensure that the company gets the best use from its financial resources .

Because current-generation DBMSs are easy to use, an unfortunate side eﬀect is that many computer-savvy business users gain a false sense of confdence in their ability to build a functional database. These users can eﬀectively navigate the creation of database objects, but without the proper understanding of database design, they tend to produce ﬂawed, overly simplifed structures that prevent the system from correctly storing data that corresponds to business realities, which produces incomplete or erroneous results when the data is retrieved.

Consider the data shown in Figure 1.4, which illustrates the eﬀorts of an organization to keep records about its employees and their skills. Some employees have not passed a certifcation test in any skill, while others have been certifed in several skills. Some certifed skills are shared by several employees, while other skills have no employees that hold those certifcations.

Based on this storage of the data, notice the following problems:

• It would be difcult, if not impossible, to produce an alphabetical listing of employees based on their last names.

• To determine how many employees are certified in Basic Database Manipulation, you would need a program that counts the number of those certifications recorded in Skill1 and places it in a variable. Then the count of those certifications in Skill2 could be calculated and added to the variable. Finally, the count of those certifications in Skill3 could be calculated and added to the variable to produce the total.

• If you redundantly store the name of a skill with each employee who is certifed in that skill, you run the risk of spelling the name diﬀerently for diﬀerent employees. For example, the skill Basic Database Manipulation is also entered as Basic DB Manipulation for at least one employee in Figure 1.4, which makes it difcult to get an accurate count of employees who have the certifcation.

•The structure of the database will have to be changed by adding more columns to the table when an employee is certifed in a fourth skill. It will have to be modifed again if an employee is certifed in a fifth skill.

Contrast this poor design with that shown in Figure 1.5, where the design has been improved by decomposing the data into three related tables.

We know have a database where the list of skills are consistent, we can now better understand who are the employees who have certifications and in what skills, and an employee table where we can retrieve the employees and sort them alphabetically.

This will be done later on in Normalizing Databases Module.