Understanding what a database is, what it does, and the proper way to use it can be clarified by considering what a database is not. A brief explanation of the evolution of file system data processing can be helpful in understanding the data access limitations that databases attempt to overcome.

Understanding these limitations is relevant to database designers and developers because database technologies do not make these problems magically disappear—database technologies simply make it easier to create solutions that avoid these problems.

Creating database designs that avoid the pitfalls of earlier systems requires that the designer understand these problems and how to avoid them; otherwise, the database technologies are no better (and are potentially even worse!) than the technologies and techniques they have replaced.

Manual File Systems

To be successful, an organization must develop systems for handling core business tasks. Historically, such systems were ofen manual, paper-and-pencil systems. The papers within these systems were organized to facilitate the expected use of the data. Typically, this was accomplished through a system of file folders and fling cabinets. As long as a collection of data was relatively small and an organization’s business users had few reporting requirements, the manual system served its role well as a data repository. However, as organizations grew and as reporting requirements became more complex, keeping track of data in a manual file system became more difficult. Therefore, companies looked to computer technology for help.

Computerized File Systems

Generating reports from manual file systems was slow and cumbersome. In fact, some business managers faced government-imposed reporting requirements that led to weeks of intensive eﬀort each quarter, even when a well-designed manual system was used. Therefore, a data processing (DP) specialist was hired to create a computer-based system that would track data and produce required reports.

Initially, the computer files within the file system were similar to the manual files. A simple example of a customer data file for a small insurance company is shown in Figure 1.6. (You will discover later that the file structure shown in Figure 1.6, although typically found in early file systems, is unsatisfactory for a database.)

The description of computer files requires a specialized vocabulary. Every discipline develops its own terminology to enable its practitioners to communicate clearly. The basic file vocabulary shown in Table 1.2 will help you to understand subsequent discussions more easily

As more and more computerized files were developed, the problems with this type of file system became apparent. The problems basically centered on having many data flies that contained related—often overlapping—data with no means of controlling or managing the data consistently across all of the files. Each file in the system used its own application program to store, retrieve, and modify data. Also, each file was owned by the individual or the department that commissioned its creation.

The advent of computer files to store company data was significant; it not only established a landmark in the use of computer technologies, it also represented a huge step forward in a business's ability to process data. Previously, users had direct, hands-on access to all of the business data. But they didn't have the tools to convert that data into the information they needed. The creation of computerized fle systems gave them improved tools for manipulating the company data that allowed them to create new information.

However, it had the additional eﬀect of introducing a schism between the end users and their data. Te desire to close the gap between the end users and the data inﬂuenced the development of many types of computer technologies, system designs, and uses (and misuses) of many technologies and techniques. However, such developments also created a split between the ways DP specialists and end users viewed the data.

• From the DP specialist’s perspective, the computer files within the file system were created to be similar to the manual files. Data management programs were created to add to, update, and delete data from the file.
• From the end user’s perspective, the systems separated the users from the data. As the users’ competitive environment pushed them to make more and more decisions in less time, users became frustrated by the delay between conceiving of a new way to create information from the data and the point when the DP specialist actually created the programs to generate that information.