Ideally, a database language allows you to create database and table structures, perform basic data management chores (add, delete, and modify), and perform complex queries designed to transform the raw data into useful information. Moreover, a database language must perform such basic functions with minimal user effort, and its command structure and syntax must be easy to learn. Finally, it must be portable; it must conform to some basic standard, so a person does not have to relearn the basics when moving from one RDBMS to another. SQL meets those ideal database language requirements well.

SQL functions fit into several broad categories:

It is a data manipulation language (DML). SQL includes commands to insert, update, delete, and retrieve data within the database tables.

It is a data definition language (DDL). SQL includes commands to create database objects such as tables, indexes, and views and commands to define access rights to those database objects.

It is a transaction control language (TCL). The DML commands in SQL are executed within the context of a transaction, a logical unit of work composed of one or more SQL statements, as defined by business rules. SQL provides commands to control the processing of these statements as an indivisible unit of work.

It is a data control language (DCL). Data control commands are used to control access to data objects, such as giving one user permission to only view the PRODUCT table and giving another user permission to change the data in the PRODUCT table.

The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) prescribes a standard SQL. The ANSI SQL standards are also accepted by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), a consortium composed of national standards bodies of more than 150 countries. Although adherence to the ANSI/ISO SQL standard is usually required in commercial and government contract database specifications, many RDBMS vendors add their own special enhancements. Consequently, it is seldom possible to move a SQL-based application from one RDBMS to another without making some changes.

Data Types

The ANSI/ISO SQL standard defines many different data types. A data type specifies the kinds of data stored in an attribute.

Data types influence queries that retrieve data because there are slight differences in the syntax of SQL and how it behaves during a query based on the data type of the column being retrieved. For now, consider that there are three fundamental types of data: character data, numeric data, and date data. Character data comprises any printable characters such as alphabetic values, digits, punctuation, and special characters. Character data is also often referred to as a “string” because it is a collection of characters threaded together to create value. Numeric data is composed of digits such that the data has a specific numeric value. Date data is composed of dates and, occasionally, time values. Although character data may contain digits, the DBMS does not recognize the numeric value of those digits.

SQL Queries

At the heart of SQL is the query.  In Chapter 1, Database Systems, you learned that a query is a spur-of-the-moment question. In the SQL environment, the word query covers questions and actions. Most SQL queries are used to answer questions such as these: “What products currently held in inventory are priced over $100, and what is the quantity on hand for each of those products?” or “How many employees have been hired since January 1, 2016, by each of the company’s departments?” However, many SQL queries are used to perform actions such as adding or deleting table rows or changing attribute values within tables. Still, other SQL queries create new tables or indexes. A query is simply a SQL statement that must be executed for a DBMS. In most database-related jobs, retrieving data is by far the most common type of task. Not only do database professionals have to know how to retrieve data from the database, but virtually all application programmers need this skill as well

Data retrieval is done in SQL using a SELECT query. When you run a SELECT command on a table, the RDBMS returns a set of one or more rows with the same characteristics as a relational table. This is a very important characteristic of SQL commands. By default, most SQL data manipulation commands operate over an entire table (relation), which is why SQL commands are said to be set-oriented commands. A SQL set-oriented command works over a set of rows. The set may include one or more columns and zero or more rows from one or more tables. A SELECT query specifies which data should be retrieved and how it should be filtered, aggregated, and displayed. There are many potential clauses, or parts, to a SELECT query, as shown in Table 7.1. Constructing a SELECT query is similar to constructing objects with building blocks. The database programmer has to understand what each building block (clause) does and how the blocks fit together. Then he or she can make a plan for which blocks to use and determine how to assemble those blocks to produce the desired result.

The Database Model

A simple database composed of the following tables illustrates the SQL commands in this chapter: CUSTOMER, INVOICE, LINE, PRODUCT, and VENDOR. This database model is shown.

The database model in the figure reflects the following business rules:

A customer may generate many invoices. Each invoice is generated by one customer.

An invoice contains one or more invoice lines. Each invoice line is associated with one invoice.

Each invoice line references one product. A product may be found in many invoice lines. (You can sell more than one hammer to more than one customer.)

A vendor may supply many products. Some vendors do not yet supply products. For example, a vendor list may include potential vendors.

If a product is vendor-supplied, it is supplied by only a single vendor.

Some products are not supplied by a vendor. For example, some products may be produced in-house or bought on the open market.

Basic SELECT Queries

Each clause in a SELECT query performs a specific function. Understanding the function of each clause is key to developing the skills to construct queries to satisfy the reporting needs of the users.

SELECT—specifies the attributes to be returned by the query

FROM—specifies the table(s) from which the data will be retrieved

WHERE—filters the rows of data based on provided criteria

GROUP BY—groups the rows of data into collections based on sharing the same values in one or more attributes

HAVING—filters the groups formed in the GROUP BY clause based on provided criteria

ORDER BY—sorts the final query result rows in ascending or descending order based on the values of one or more attributes.

Although SQL commands can be grouped together on a single line, complex command sequences are best shown on separate lines, with space between the SQL command and the command’s components. Using that formatting convention makes it much easier to see the components of the SQL statements, which in turn makes it easy to trace the SQL logic and make corrections if necessary. The number of spaces used in the indention is up to you. For a SELECT query to retrieve data from the database, it will require at least a SELECT column list and a FROM clause.

The column list allows the programmer to specify which columns should be retrieved by the query and the order in which they should be returned. Only columns specified in the column list will appear in the query result. The FROM clause is used to specify the table from which the data will be retrieved. It is common for queries to retrieve data from multiple tables that have been joined together. However, first, we will focus on things that can be done with the column list before we move on to the FROM clause options.

SELECT Statement Options

The SELECT query specifies the columns to be retrieved as a column list. The syntax for a basic SELECT query that retrieves data from a table is

SELECT columnlist

FROM tablelist;

The columnlist represents one or more attributes, separated by commas. If the programmer wants all of the columns to be returned, then the asterisk (*) wildcard can be used. A wildcard character is a symbol that can be used as a general substitute for other characters or commands. This wildcard means “all columns.”

Using Column Aliases

Recall that the attribute within an entity is implemented as a column in the table. The attribute name becomes the name of that column. When that column is retrieved in a query, the attribute name is used as a label, or column heading, in the query output by default. If the programmer wants a different name to be used as the label in the output, a new name can be specified. The new name is referred to as an alias.

Using Computed Columns

A computed column (also called a calculated column) represents a derived attribute.

Arithmetic Operators: The Rule of Precedence

You can use arithmetic operators with table attributes in a column list or in a conditional expression. In fact, SQL commands are often used in conjunction with the arithmetic operators shown.

Do not confuse the multiplication symbol ( * ) with the wildcard symbol used by some SQL implementations, such as MS Access. The wildcard symbol is used only in string comparisons, while the multiplication symbol is used in conjunction with mathematical procedures.

As you perform mathematical operations on attributes, remember the mathematical rules of precedence. As the name suggests, the rules of precedence are the rules that establish the order in which computations are completed. For example, note the order of the following computational sequence:

Perform operations within parentheses.

Perform power operations.

Perform multiplications and divisions.

Perform additions and subtractions.