A data manipulation language (DML) includes commands to insert, update, delete, and retrieve data within the database tables.

DML(Data Manipulation Language) :The SQL commands that deals with the manipulation of data present in the database belong to DML or Data Manipulation Language and this includes most of the SQL statements.

Examples of DML:

INSERT– is used to insert data into a table.

UPDATE– is used to update existing data within a table.

DELETE– is used to delete records from a database table.

The SQL INSERT INTO Statement
The INSERT INTO statement is used to insert new records in a table.
INSERT INTO Syntax
It is possible to write the INSERT INTO statement in two ways.

The first way specifies both the column names and the values to be inserted:

INSERTINTOtable_name(column1,column2,column3, ...)
VALUES(value1,value2,value3, ...);

If you are adding values for all the columns of the table, you do not need to specify the column names in the SQL query. However, make sure the order of the values is in the same order as the columns in the table. The INSERT INTO syntax would be as follows:

INSERTINTOtable_name
VALUES(value1,value2,value3, ...);

The SQL UPDATE Statement
The UPDATE statement is used to modify the existing records in a table.
UPDATE Syntax

UPDATEtable_name
SETcolumn1=value1,column2=value2, ...
WHEREcondition;

UPDATE Table
The following SQL statement updates the first customer (CustomerID = 1) with a new contact personanda new city.

Example
UPDATECustomers
SETContactName ='Alfred Schmidt', City='Frankfurt'
WHERECustomerID =1;

The SQL DELETE Statement
The DELETE statement is used to delete existing records in a table.
DELETE Syntax

DELETEFROMtable_nameWHEREcondition;

SQL DELETE Example
The following SQL statement deletes the customer "Alfreds Futterkiste" from the "Customers" table:

Example
DELETEFROMCustomersWHERECustomerName='Alfreds Futterkiste';

Delete All Records
It is possible to delete all rows in a table without deleting the table. This means that the table structure, attributes, and indexes will be intact:

DELETEFROMtable_name;

The following SQL statement deletes all rows in the "Customers" table, without deleting the table:

Example
DELETEFROMCustomers;