The data definition language (DDL) includes commands to create database objects such as tables, indexes, and views, as well as commands to define access rights to those database objects.

DDL(Data Definition Language) :DDL or Data Definition Language actually consists of the SQL commands that can be used to define the database schema. It simply deals with descriptions of the database schema and is used to create and modify the structure of database objects in the database.

Examples of DDL commands:

CREATE– is used to create the database or its objects (like table, index, function, views, store procedure and triggers).

DROP– is used to delete objects from the database.

ALTER-is used to alter the structure of the database.

TRUNCATE–is used to remove all records from a table, including all spaces allocated for the records are removed.

COMMENT–is used to add comments to the data dictionary.

RENAME–is used to rename an object existing in the database.

The SQL CREATE DATABASE Statement
The CREATE DATABASE statement is used to create a new SQL database.
Syntax

CREATEDATABASEdatabasename;

CREATE DATABASE Example
The following SQL statement creates a database called "testDB":

Example
CREATEDATABASEtestDB;

The SQL DROP DATABASE Statement
The DROP DATABASE statement is used to drop an existing SQL database.
Syntax

DROPDATABASEdatabasename;

DROP DATABASE Example
The following SQL statement drops the existing database "testDB":

Example
DROPDATABASEtestDB;

The SQL CREATE TABLE Statement
The CREATE TABLE statement is used to create a new table in a database.
Syntax

CREATETABLEtable_name(
column1 datatype,
column2 datatype,
column3 datatype,
....
);

The column parameters specify the names of the columns of the table.

The datatype parameter specifies the type of data the column can hold (e.g. varchar, integer, date, etc.)
SQL CREATE TABLE Example
The following example creates a table called "Persons" that contains five columns: PersonID, LastName, FirstName, Address, and City:

Example
CREATETABLEPersons (
PersonID int,
LastName varchar(255),
FirstName varchar(255),
Address varchar(255),
City varchar(255)
);

Create Table Using Another Table
A copy of an existing table can also be created using CREATE TABLE.

The new table gets the same column definitions. All columns or specific columns can be selected.

If you create a new table using an existing table, the new table will be filled with the existing values from the old table.
Syntax

CREATETABLEnew_table_nameAS
SELECTcolumn1, column2,...
FROMexisting_table_name
WHERE....;

The following SQL creates a new table called "TestTables" (which is a copy of the "Customers" table):

Example
CREATETABLETestTableAS
SELECTcustomername, contactname
FROMcustomers;

The SQL DROP TABLE Statement
The DROP TABLE statement is used to drop an existing table in a database.
Syntax

DROPTABLEtable_name;

SQL DROP TABLE Example
The following SQL statement drops the existing table "Shippers":

Example
DROPTABLEShippers;

SQL TRUNCATE TABLE
The TRUNCATE TABLE statement is used to delete the data inside a table, but not the table itself.
Syntax

TRUNCATETABLEtable_name;

SQL ALTER TABLE Statement
The ALTER TABLE statement is used to add, delete, or modify columns in an existing table.

The ALTER TABLE statement is also used to add and drop various constraints on an existing table.
ALTER TABLE - ADD Column
To add a column in a table, use the following syntax:

ALTERTABLEtable_name
ADDcolumn_name datatype;

The following SQL adds an "Email" column to the "Customers" table:

Example
ALTERTABLECustomers
ADDEmail varchar(255);

ALTER TABLE - DROP COLUMN
To delete a column in a table, use the following syntax (notice that some database systems don't allow deleting a column):

ALTERTABLEtable_name
DROPCOLUMNcolumn_name;

The following SQL deletes the "Email" column from the "Customers" table:

Example
ALTERTABLECustomers
DROPCOLUMNEmail;

ALTER TABLE - ALTER/MODIFY COLUMN
To change the data type of a column in a table, use the following syntax:

ALTERTABLEtable_name
MODIFYCOLUMNcolumn_name datatype;