Now that we have studied linear data structures like stacks and queues and have some experience with recursion, we will look at a common data structure called thetree. Trees are used in many areas of computer science, including operating systems, graphics, database systems, and computer networking. Tree data structures have many things in common with their botanical cousins. A tree data structure has a root, branches, and leaves. The difference between a tree in nature and a tree in computer science is that a tree data structure has its root at the top and its leaves on the bottom.

Before we begin our study of tree data structures, let’s look at a few common examples. Our first example of a tree is a classification tree from biology.Figure 1shows an example of the biological classification of some animals. From this simple example, we can learn about several properties of trees. The first property this example demonstrates is that trees are hierarchical. By hierarchical, we mean that trees are structured in layers with the more general things near the top and the more specific things near the bottom. The top of the hierarchy is the Kingdom, the next layer of the tree (the “children” of the layer above) is the Phylum, then the Class, and so on. However, no matter how deep we go in the classification tree, all the organisms are still animals.

<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/_images/biology.png>

Figure 1: Taxonomy of Some Common Animals Shown as a Tree

Notice that you can start at the top of the tree and follow a path made of circles and arrows all the way to the bottom. At each level of the tree we might ask ourselves a question and then follow the path that agrees with our answer. For example we might ask, “Is this animal a Chordate or an Arthropod?” If the answer is “Chordate” then we follow that path and ask, “Is this Chordate a Mammal?” If not, we are stuck (but only in this simplified example). When we are at the Mammal level we ask, “Is this Mammal a Primate or a Carnivore?” We can keep following paths until we get to the very bottom of the tree where we have the common name.

A second property of trees is that all of the children of one node are independent of the children of another node. For example, the Genus Felis has the children Domestica and Leo. The Genus Musca also has a child named Domestica, but it is a different node and is independent of the Domestica child of Felis. This means that we can change the node that is the child of Musca without affecting the child of Felis.

A third property is that each leaf node is unique. We can specify a path from the root of the tree to a leaf that uniquely identifies each species in the animal kingdom; for example, Animalia → Chordate → Mammal → Carnivora → Felidae → Felis → Domestica.

Another example of a tree structure that you probably use every day is a file system. In a file system, directories, or folders, are structured as a tree. Figure 2 illustrates a small part of a Unix file system hierarchy.

<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/_images/directory.png>

Figure 2: A Small Part of the Unix File System Hierarchy

The file system tree has much in common with the biological classification tree. You can follow a path from the root to any directory. That path will uniquely identify that subdirectory (and all the files in it). Another important property of trees, derived from their hierarchical nature, is that you can move entire sections of a tree (called asubtree) to a different position in the tree without affecting the lower levels of the hierarchy. For example, we could take the entire subtree staring with /etc/, detach etc/ from the root and reattach it under usr/. This would change the unique pathname to httpd from /etc/httpd to /usr/etc/httpd, but would not affect the contents or any children of the httpd directory.

A final example of a tree is a web page. The following is an example of a simple web page written using HTML.Figure 3shows the tree that corresponds to each of the HTML tags used to create the page.

<htmlxmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"xml:lang="en"lang="en"><head><metahttp-equiv="Content-Type"content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>simple</title></head><body><h1>Asimplewebpage</h1><ul><li>Listitemone</li><li>Listitemtwo</li></ul><h2><ahref="http://www.cs.luther.edu">LutherCS</a></h2></body></html>

Figure 3: A Tree Corresponding to the Markup Elements of a Web Page<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/ExamplesofTrees.html#id3>

The HTML source code and the tree accompanying the source illustrate another hierarchy. Notice that each level of the tree corresponds to a level of nesting inside the HTML tags. The first tag in the source is<html>and the last is</html>All the rest of the tags in the page are inside the pair. If you check, you will see that this nesting property is true at all levels of the tree.

Vocabulary and Definitions
Now that we have looked at examples of trees, we will formally define a tree and its components.

Node

A node is a fundamental part of a tree. It can have a name, which we call the “key.” A node may also have additional information. We call this additional information the “payload.” While the payload information is not central to many tree algorithms, it is often critical in applications that make use of trees.

Edge

An edge is another fundamental part of a tree. An edge connects two nodes to show that there is a relationship between them. Every node (except the root) is connected by exactly one incoming edge from another node. Each node may have several outgoing edges.

Root

The root of the tree is the only node in the tree that has no incoming edges. In Figure 2, / is the root of the tree.

Path

A path is an ordered list of nodes that are connected by edges. For example, Mammal → Carnivora → Felidae → Felis → Domestica is a path.

Children

The set of nodes c that have incoming edges from the same node to are said to be the children of that node. In Figure 2, nodes log/, spool/, and yp/ are the children of node var/.

Parent

A node is the parent of all the nodes it connects to with outgoing edges. In Figure 2 the node var/ is the parent of nodes log/, spool/, and yp/.

Sibling

Nodes in the tree that are children of the same parent are said to be siblings. The nodes etc/ and usr/ are siblings in the filesystem tree.

Subtree

A subtree is a set of nodes and edges comprised of a parent and all the descendants of that parent.

Leaf Node

A leaf node is a node that has no children. For example, Human and Chimpanzee are leaf nodes in Figure 1.

Level

The level of a node n is the number of edges on the path from the root node to n. For example, the level of the Felis node in Figure 1 is five. By definition, the level of the root node is zero.

Height

The height of a tree is equal to the maximum level of any node in the tree. The height of the tree in Figure 2 is two.

With the basic vocabulary now defined, we can move on to a formal definition of a tree. In fact, we will provide two definitions of a tree. One definition involves nodes and edges. The second definition, which will prove to be very useful, is a recursive definition.

Definition One:A tree consists of a set of nodes and a set of edges that connect pairs of nodes. A tree has the following properties:

One node of the tree is designated as the root node.

Every nodenn, except the root node, is connected by an edge from exactly one other nodepp, whereppis the parent ofnn.

A unique path traverses from the root to each node.

If each node in the tree has a maximum of two children, we say that the tree is abinary tree.

Figure 3illustrates a tree that fits definition one. The arrowheads on the edges indicate the direction of the connection.

Figure 3: A Tree Consisting of a Set of Nodes and Edges<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/VocabularyandDefinitions.html#id1>

Definition Two:A tree is either empty or consists of a root and zero or more subtrees, each of which is also a tree. The root of each subtree is connected to the root of the parent tree by an edge.Figure 4illustrates this recursive definition of a tree. Using the recursive definition of a tree, we know that the tree in[Figure 4](https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/VocabularyandDefinitions.html#fig-recursivetree)has at least four nodes, since each of the triangles representing a subtree must have a root. It may have many more nodes than that, but we do not know unless we look deeper into the tree.

Figure 4: A recursive Definition of a tree

Nodes and References
Our second method to represent a tree uses nodes and references. In this case we will define a class that has attributes for the root value, as well as the left and right subtrees. Since this representation more closely follows the object-oriented programming paradigm, we will continue to use this representation for the remainder of the chapter.

Using nodes and references, we might think of the tree as being structured like the one shown inFigure 2.

Figure 2: A Simple Tree Using a Nodes and References Approach<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/NodesandReferences.html#id1>

We will start out with a simple class definition for the nodes and references approach as shown inListing 4. The important thing to remember about this representation is that the attributesleftandrightwill become references to other instances of theBinaryTreeclass. For example, when we insert a new left child into the tree we create another instance ofBinaryTreeand modifyself.leftChildin the root to reference the new tree.
#include <iostream>#include <cstdlib>usingnamespacestd;classBinaryTree{private:charkey;BinaryTree*leftChild;BinaryTree*rightChild;public:BinaryTree(charrootObj){this->key=rootObj;this->leftChild=NULL;this->rightChild=NULL;}
Notice that inthe code above, the constructor function expects to get some kind of object to store in the root. Just like you can store any object you like in an array, the root object of a tree can be a reference to any object. For our early examples, we will store the name of the node as the root value. Using nodes and references to represent the tree inFigure 2, we would create six instances of the BinaryTree class.

Next let’s look at the functions we need to build the tree beyond the root node. To add a left child to the tree, we will create a new binary tree object and set theleftattribute of the root to refer to this new object. The code forinsertLeftis shown in the code below.
voidinsertLeft(charnewNode){if(this->leftChild==NULL){this->leftChild=newBinaryTree(newNode);}else{BinaryTree*t=newBinaryTree(newNode);t->leftChild=this->leftChild;this->leftChild=t;}}
We must consider two cases for insertion. The first case is characterized by a node with no existing left child. When there is no left child, simply add a node to the tree. The second case is characterized by a node with an existing left child. In the second case, we insert a node and push the existing child down one level in the tree. The second case is handled by the else statement on line 4.

The code for insertRight must consider a symmetric set of cases. There will either be no right child, or we must insert the node between the root and an existing right child. The insertion code is shown below.
voidinsertRight(charnewNode){if(this->rightChild==NULL){this->rightChild=newBinaryTree(newNode);}else{BinaryTree*t=newBinaryTree(newNode);t->rightChild=this->rightChild;this->rightChild=t;}}
To round out the definition for a simple binary tree data structure, we will write accessor methods (see below) for the left and right children, as well as the root values.
BinaryTree*getRightChild(){returnthis->rightChild;}BinaryTree*getLeftChild(){returnthis->leftChild;}voidsetRootVal(charobj){this->key=obj;}chargetRootVal(){returnthis->key;}
Now that we have all the pieces to create and manipulate a binary tree, let’s use them to check on the structure a bit more. Let’s make a simple tree with node a as the root, and add nodes b and c as children. The code below creates the tree and looks at the some of the values stored in key, left, and right. Notice that both the left and right children of the root are themselves distinct instances of the BinaryTree class. As we said in our original recursive definition for a tree, this allows us to treat any child of a binary tree as a binary tree itself.
#include <iostream>
#include <cstdlib>
using namespace std;

//creates a binary tree, allows you to insert nodes
// and access those nodes.
class BinaryTree {

private:
char key;
BinaryTree *leftChild; // reference other instances of the binary tree the BinaryTree class
BinaryTree *rightChild; // reference other instances of the binary tree the BinaryTree class

public: //constructor function expects to get some kind of object to store in the root
BinaryTree(char rootObj){
this->key = rootObj;
this->leftChild = NULL;
this->rightChild = NULL;
}

void insertLeft(char newNode){ // Handles insertion if there is no left child simply adds a node to the tree.
if (this->leftChild == NULL){
this->leftChild = new BinaryTree(newNode);
}
else { // handles insertion if there is a left child pushes the existing child down one level in the tree.
BinaryTree *t = new BinaryTree(newNode);
t->leftChild = this->leftChild;
this->leftChild = t;
}
}

void insertRight(char newNode){
if (this->rightChild == NULL){
this->rightChild = new BinaryTree(newNode);
}
else {
BinaryTree *t = new BinaryTree(newNode);
t->rightChild = this->rightChild;
this->rightChild = t;
}
}

BinaryTree *getRightChild(){ // accessor method
return this->rightChild;
}

BinaryTree *getLeftChild(){ // accessor method
return this->leftChild;
}

void setRootVal(char obj){ // accessor method
this->key = obj;
}

char getRootVal(){ // accessor method
return this->key;
}
};

int main() {
BinaryTree *r = new BinaryTree('a');
cout << r->getRootVal() << endl;
cout << r->getLeftChild() << endl;
r->insertLeft('b');
cout << r->getLeftChild() << endl;
cout << r->getLeftChild()->getRootVal() << endl;
r->insertRight('c');
cout << r->getRightChild() << endl;
cout << r->getRightChild()->getRootVal() << endl;
r->getRightChild()->setRootVal('d');
cout << r->getRightChild()->getRootVal() << endl;

return 0;
}

"Problem Solving with Algorithms and Data Structures using C++" by Bradley N. Miller, David L. Ranum, and Janice L. Pearce is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.