Parse Tree
With the implementation of our tree data structure complete, we now look at an example of how a tree can be used to solve some real problems. In this section we will look at parse trees. Parse trees can be used to represent real-world constructions like sentences or mathematical expressions.

Figure 1: A Parse Tree for a Simple Sentence<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/ParseTree.html#id1>

Figure 1shows the hierarchical structure of a simple sentence. Representing a sentence as a tree structure allows us to work with the individual parts of the sentence by using subtrees.

Figure 2: Parse Tree for

We can also represent a mathematical expression such as  as a parse tree, as shown in Figure 2. We have already looked at fully parenthesized expressions, so what do we know about this expression? We know that multiplication has a higher precedence than either addition or subtraction. Because of the parentheses, we know that before we can do the multiplication we must evaluate the parenthesized addition and subtraction expressions. The hierarchy of the tree helps us understand the order of evaluation for the whole expression. Before we can evaluate the top-level multiplication, we must evaluate the addition and the subtraction in the subtrees. The addition, which is the left subtree, evaluates to 10. The subtraction, which is the right subtree, evaluates to 3. Using the hierarchical structure of trees, we can simply replace an entire subtree with one node once we have evaluated the expressions in the children. Applying this replacement procedure gives us the simplified tree shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3: A Simplified Parse Tree for ((7+3)∗(5−2))

In the rest of this section we are going to examine parse trees in more detail. In particular we will look at

How to build a parse tree from a fully parenthesized mathematical expression.

How to evaluate the expression stored in a parse tree.

How to recover the original mathematical expression from a parse tree.

The first step in building a parse tree is to break up the expression string into a vector of tokens. There are four different kinds of tokens to consider: left parentheses, right parentheses, operators, and operands. We know that whenever we read a left parenthesis we are starting a new expression, and hence we should create a new tree to correspond to that expression. Conversely, whenever we read a right parenthesis, we have finished an expression. We also know that operands are going to be leaf nodes and children of their operators. Finally, we know that every operator is going to have both a left and a right child.

Using the information from above we can define four rules as follows:

If the current token is a'(', add a new node as the left child of the current node, and descend to the left child.

If the current token is in the vector['+','-','/','*'], set the root value of the current node to the operator represented by the current token. Add a new node as the right child of the current node and descend to the right child.

If the current token is a number, set the root value of the current node to the number and return to the parent.

If the current token is a')', go to the parent of the current node.

Before writing the C++ code, let’s look at an example of the rules outlined above in action. We will use the expression . We will parse this expression into the following vector of character tokens ['(','3','+','(','4','*','5',')',')']. Initially we will start out with a parse tree that consists of an empty root node. Figure 4 illustrates the structure and contents of the parse tree, as each new token is processed.

Figure 4: Tracing Parse Tree Construction<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/ParseTree.html#id4>

UsingFigure 4, let’s walk through the example step by step:

Create an empty tree.

Read ( as the first token. By rule 1, create a new node as the left child of the root. Make the current node this new child.

Read 3 as the next token. By rule 3, set the root value of the current node to 3 and go back up the tree to the parent.

Read + as the next token. By rule 2, set the root value of the current node to + and add a new node as the right child. The new right child becomes the current node.

Read ( as the next token. By rule 1, create a new node as the left child of the current node. The new left child becomes the current node.

Read 4 as the next token. By rule 3, set the value of the current node to 4. Make the parent of 4 the current node.

Read * as the next token. By rule 2, set the root value of the current node to * and create a new right child. The new right child becomes the current node.

Read 5 as the next token. By rule 3, set the root value of the current node to 5. Make the parent of 5 the current node.

Read ) as the next token. By rule 4 we make the parent of * the current node.

Read ) as the next token. By rule 4 we make the parent of + the current node. At this point there is no parent for + so we are done.

From the example above, it is clear that we need to keep track of the current node as well as the parent of the current node. The tree interface provides us with a way to get children of a node, through thegetLeftChildandgetRightChildmethods, but how can we keep track of the parent? A simple solution to keeping track of parents as we traverse the tree is to use a stack. Whenever we want to descend to a child of the current node, we first push the current node on the stack. When we want to return to the parent of the current node, we pop the parent off the stack.

Using the rules described above, along with the Stack and BinaryTree operations, we are now ready to write a C++ function to create a parse tree
#include <iostream>
#include <cstdlib>
#include <stack>
#include <sstream>
#include <string>
#include <vector>
#include <algorithm>
using namespace std;

class BinaryTree {

private:
string key;
BinaryTree *leftChild;
BinaryTree *rightChild;
public:
BinaryTree(string rootObj){
this->key = rootObj;
this->leftChild = NULL;
this->rightChild = NULL;
}

void insertLeft(string newNode){
if (this->leftChild == NULL){
this->leftChild = new BinaryTree(newNode);
}
else {
BinaryTree *t = new BinaryTree(newNode);
t->leftChild = this->leftChild;
this->leftChild = t;
}
}

void insertRight(string newNode){
if (this->rightChild == NULL){
this->rightChild = new BinaryTree(newNode);
}
else {
BinaryTree *t = new BinaryTree(newNode);
t->rightChild = this->rightChild;
this->rightChild = t;
}
}

BinaryTree *getRightChild(){
return this->rightChild;
}

BinaryTree *getLeftChild(){
return this->leftChild;
}

void setRootVal(string obj){
this->key = obj;
}

string getRootVal(){
return this->key;
}
};

BinaryTree *buildParseTree(string fpexp){
string buf;
stringstream ss(fpexp);
vector<string> fplist;
while (ss >> buf){
fplist.push_back(buf);
}
stack<BinaryTree*> pStack;
BinaryTree *eTree = new BinaryTree("");
pStack.push(eTree);
BinaryTree *currentTree = eTree;

string arr[] = {"+", "-", "*", "/"};
vector<string> vect(arr,arr+(sizeof(arr)/ sizeof(arr[0])));

string arr2[] = {"+", "-", "*", "/", ")"};
vector<string> vect2(arr2,arr2+(sizeof(arr2)/ sizeof(arr2[0])));

for (unsigned int i = 0; i<fplist.size(); i++){

if (fplist[i] == "("){
currentTree->insertLeft("");
pStack.push(currentTree);
currentTree = currentTree->getLeftChild();
}

else if (find(vect.begin(), vect.end(), fplist[i]) != vect.end()){
currentTree->setRootVal(fplist[i]);
currentTree->insertRight("");
pStack.push(currentTree);
currentTree = currentTree->getRightChild();
}

else if (fplist[i] == ")"){
currentTree = pStack.top();
pStack.pop();
}

else if (find(vect2.begin(), vect2.end(), fplist[i]) == vect2.end()) {
try {
currentTree->setRootVal(fplist[i]);
BinaryTree *parent = pStack.top();
pStack.pop();
currentTree = parent;
}

catch (string ValueError ){
cerr <<"token " << fplist[i] << " is not a valid integer"<<endl;
}
}
}
return eTree;
}

void postorder(BinaryTree *tree){
if (tree != NULL){
postorder(tree->getLeftChild());
postorder(tree->getRightChild());
cout << tree->getRootVal() << endl;
}
}

int main() {

BinaryTree *pt = buildParseTree("( ( 10 + 5 ) * 3 )");

postorder(pt);

return 0;
}

Tree Traversals
Now that we have examined the basic functionality of our tree data structure, it is time to look at some additional usage patterns for trees. These usage patterns can be divided into the three ways that we access the nodes of the tree. There are three commonly used patterns to visit all the nodes in a tree. The difference between these patterns is the order in which each node is visited. We call this visitation of the nodes a “traversal.” The three traversals we will look at are calledpreorder,inorder, andpostorder. Let’s start out by defining these three traversals more carefully, then look at some examples where these patterns are useful.

Figure 5: Example tree to be traversed.<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/TreeTraversals.html#id1>

preorder
In a preorder traversal, we visit the root node first, then recursively do a preorder traversal of the left subtree, followed by a recursive preorder traversal of the right subtree.

Figure 6: Traversal pattern for preorder.<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/TreeTraversals.html#id2>

inorder
In an inorder traversal, we recursively do an inorder traversal on the left subtree, visit the root node, and finally do a recursive inorder traversal of the right subtree.

Figure 7: Traversal pattern for inorder.<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/TreeTraversals.html#id3>

postorder
In a postorder traversal, we recursively do a postorder traversal of the left subtree and the right subtree followed by a visit to the root node.

Figure 8: Traversal pattern for postorder.<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/TreeTraversals.html#id4>

Let’s look at some examples that illustrate each of these three kinds of traversals. First let’s look at the preorder traversal. As an example of a tree to traverse, we will represent this book as a tree. The book is the root of the tree, and each chapter is a child of the root. Each section within a chapter is a child of the chapter, and each subsection is a child of its section, and so on.Figure 5shows a limited version of a book with only two chapters. Note that the traversal algorithm works for trees with any number of children, but we will stick with binary trees for now.

Figure 9: Representing a Book as a Tree<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/TreeTraversals.html#id5>

Suppose that you wanted to read this book from front to back. The preorder traversal gives you exactly that ordering. Starting at the root of the tree (the Book node) we will follow the preorder traversal instructions. We recursively callpreorderon the left child, in this case Chapter1. We again recursively callpreorderon the left child to get to Section 1.1. Since Section 1.1 has no children, we do not make any additional recursive calls. When we are finished with Section 1.1, we move up the tree to Chapter 1. At this point we still need to visit the right subtree of Chapter 1, which is Section 1.2. As before we visit the left subtree, which brings us to Section 1.2.1, then we visit the node for Section 1.2.2. With Section 1.2 finished, we return to Chapter 1. Then we return to the Book node and follow the same procedure for Chapter 2.

The code for writing tree traversals is surprisingly elegant, largely because the traversals are written recursively. The code belowshows the C++ code for a preorder traversal of a binary tree.

You may wonder, what is the best way to write an algorithm like preorder traversal? Should it be a function that simply uses a tree as a data structure, or should it be a method of the tree data structure itself? The code belowshows a version of the preorder traversal written as an external function that takes a binary tree as a parameter. The external function is particularly elegant because our base case is simply to check if the tree exists. If the tree parameter isNone, then the function returns without taking any action.
voidpreorder(BinaryTree*tree){if(tree){cout<<tree->getRootVal()<<endl;preorder(tree->getLeftChild());preorder(tree->getRightChild());}}
We can also implement preorder as a method of the BinaryTree class. The code for implementing preorder as an internal method is shown in the code below. Notice what happens when we move the code from external to internal. In general, we just replace tree with self. However, we also need to modify the base case. The internal method must check for the existence of the left and the right children before making the recursive call to preorder.
voidpreorder(){cout<<this->key<<endl;if(this->leftChild){this->leftChild->preorder();}if(this->rightChild){this->rightChild->preorder();}}
Which of these two ways to implementpreorderis best? The answer is that implementingpreorderas an external function is probably better in this case. The reason is that you very rarely want to just traverse the tree. In most cases you are going to want to accomplish something else while using one of the basic traversal patterns. In fact, we will see in the next example that thepostordertraversal pattern follows very closely with the code we wrote earlier to evaluate a parse tree. Therefore we will write the rest of the traversals as external functions.

The algorithm for thepostordertraversal, shown in the code below, is nearly identical topreorderexcept that we move the call to print to the end of the function.
voidpostorder(BinaryTree*tree){if(tree!=NULL){postorder(tree->getLeftChild());postorder(tree->getRightChild());cout<<tree->getRootVal()<<endl;}}
We have already seen a common use for the postorder traversal, namely evaluating a parse tree. What we are doing is evaluating the left subtree, evaluating the right subtree, and combining them in the root through the function call to an operator. Assume that our binary tree is going to store only expression tree data. Let’s rewrite the evaluation function, but model it even more closely on the postorder code.

classOperator{public:intadd(intx,inty){returnx+y;}intsub(intx,inty){returnx-y;}intmul(intx,inty){returnx*y;}intdiv(intx,inty){returnx/y;}};intto_int(stringstr){stringstreamconvert(str);intx=0;convert>>x;returnx;}stringto_string(intnum){stringstr;ostringstreamconvert;convert<<num;str=convert.str();returnstr;}stringevaluate(BinaryTree*parseTree){OperatorOper;BinaryTree*leftC=parseTree->getLeftChild();BinaryTree*rightC=parseTree->getRightChild();if(leftC&&rightC){if(parseTree->getRootVal()=="+"){returnto_string(Oper.add(to_int(evaluate(leftC)),to_int(evaluate(rightC))));}elseif(parseTree->getRootVal()=="-"){returnto_string(Oper.sub(to_int(evaluate(leftC)),to_int(evaluate(rightC))));}elseif(parseTree->getRootVal()=="*"){returnto_string(Oper.mul(to_int(evaluate(leftC)),to_int(evaluate(rightC))));}else{returnto_string(Oper.div(to_int(evaluate(leftC)),to_int(evaluate(rightC))));}}else{returnparseTree->getRootVal();}}intmain(){return0;}

classOperator{public:intadd(intx,inty){returnx+y;}intsub(intx,inty){returnx-y;}intmul(intx,inty){returnx*y;}intdiv(intx,inty){returnx/y;}};intto_int(stringstr){stringstreamconvert(str);intx=0;convert>>x;returnx;}stringt_string(intnum){stringstr;ostringstreamconvert;convert<<num;str=convert.str();returnstr;}stringpostordereval(BinaryTree*tree){OperatorOper;BinaryTree*res1=tree->getLeftChild();BinaryTree*res2=tree->getRightChild();if(tree){if(res1&&res2){if(tree->getRootVal()=="+"){returnt_string(Oper.add(to_int(postordereval(res1)),to_int(postordereval(res2))));}elseif(tree->getRootVal()=="-"){returnt_string(Oper.sub(to_int(postordereval(res1)),to_int(postordereval(res2))));}elseif(tree->getRootVal()=="*"){returnt_string(Oper.mul(to_int(postordereval(res1)),to_int(postordereval(res2))));}else{returnt_string(Oper.div(to_int(postordereval(res1)),to_int(postordereval(res2))));}}else{returntree->getRootVal();}}}

defpostordereval(tree):opers={'+':operator.add,'-':operator.sub,'*':operator.mul,'/':operator.truediv}res1=Noneres2=Noneiftree:res1=postordereval(tree.getLeftChild())res2=postordereval(tree.getRightChild())ifres1andres2:returnopers[tree.getRootVal()](res1,res2)else:returntree.getRootVal()

The final traversal we will look at in this section is the inorder traversal. In the inorder traversal we visit the left subtree, followed by the root, and finally the right subtree. Below shows our code for the inorder traversal. Notice that in all three of the traversal functions we are simply changing the position of the print statement with respect to the two recursive function calls.
voidinorder(BinaryTree*tree){if(tree!=NULL){inorder(tree->getLeftChild());cout<<tree->getRootVal();inorder(tree->getRightChild());}}
If we perform a simple inorder traversal of a parse tree we get our original expression back, without any parentheses. Let’s modify the basic inorder algorithm to allow us to recover the fully parenthesized version of the expression. The only modifications we will make to the basic template are as follows: print a left parenthesis before the recursive call to the left subtree, and print a right parenthesis after the recursive call to the right subtree. The modified code is shown below.
stringprintexp(BinaryTree*tree){stringsVal;if(tree){sVal="("+printexp(tree->getLeftChild());sVal=sVal+tree->getRootVal();sVal=sVal+printexp(tree->getRightChild())+")";}returnsVal;}
Notice that the printexp function as we have implemented it puts parentheses around each number. While not incorrect, the parentheses are clearly not needed. In the exercises at the end of this chapter you are asked to modify the printexp function to remove this set of parentheses.

"Problem Solving with Algorithms and Data Structures using C++" by Bradley N. Miller, David L. Ranum, and Janice L. Pearce is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.