We have already seen two different ways to get key-value pairs in a collection. Recall that these collections implement the map abstract data type. The two implementations of a map ADT we discussed were binary search on a vector and hash tables. In this section we will study binary search trees as yet another way to map from a key to a value. In this case we are not interested in the exact placement of items in the tree, but we are interested in using the binary tree structure to provide for efficient searching.

BST Operations
Before we look at the implementation, let’s review the interface provided by the map ADT. You will notice that this interface is very similar to the C++ Hash Table.

Map()Create a new, empty map.

put(key,val)Add a new key-value pair to the map. If the key is already in the map then replace the old value with the new value.

get(key)Given a key, return the value stored in the map orNULLotherwise.

delDelete the key-value pair from the map using a statement of the formdelmap[key].

length()Return the number of key-value pairs stored in the map.

BST Implementations
A binary search tree relies on the property that keys that are less than the parent are found in the left subtree, and keys that are greater than the parent are found in the right subtree. We will call this thebst property. As we implement the Map interface as described above, the bst property will guide our implementation.Figure 1illustrates this property of a binary search tree, showing the keys without any associated values. Notice that the property holds for each parent and child. All of the keys in the left subtree are less than the key in the root. All of the keys in the right subtree are greater than the root.

Figure 1: A Simple Binary Search Tree<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/SearchTreeImplementation.html#id1>

Now that you know what a binary search tree is, we will look at how a binary search tree is constructed. The search tree inFigure 1represents the nodes that exist after we have inserted the following keys in the order shown:70,31,93,94,14,23,7370,31,93,94,14,23,73. Since 70 was the first key inserted into the tree, it is the root. Next, 31 is less than 70, so it becomes the left child of 70. Next, 93 is greater than 70, so it becomes the right child of 70. Now we have two levels of the tree filled, so the next key is going to be the left or right child of either 31 or 93. Since 94 is greater than 70 and 93, it becomes the right child of 93. Similarly 14 is less than 70 and 31, so it becomes the left child of 31. 23 is also less than 31, so it must be in the left subtree of 31. However, it is greater than 14, so it becomes the right child of 14.

To implement the binary search tree, we will use the nodes and references approach similar to the one we used to implement the linked list, and the expression tree. However, because we must be able to create and work with a binary search tree that is empty, our implementation will use two classes. The first class we will callBinarySearchTree, and the second class we will callTreeNode. TheBinarySearchTreeclass has a reference to theTreeNodethat is the root of the binary search tree. In most cases the external methods defined in the outer class simply check to see if the tree is empty. If there are nodes in the tree, the request is just passed on to a private method defined in theBinarySearchTreeclass that takes the root as a parameter. In the case where the tree is empty or we want to delete the key at the root of the tree, we must take special action. The code for theBinarySearchTreeclass constructor along with a few other miscellaneous functions is shown in the code below.

classBinarySearchTree{private:TreeNode*root;intsize;public:BinarySearchTree(){this->root=NULL;this->size=0;}intlength(){returnthis->size;}}

TheTreeNodeclass provides many helper functions that make the work done in theBinarySearchTreeclass methods much easier. The constructor for aTreeNode, along with these helper functions, is shown in the next code below. As you can see in the listing many of these helper functions help to classify a node according to its own position as a child, (left or right) and the kind of children the node has. TheTreeNodeclass will also explicitly keep track of the parent as an attribute of each node. You will see why this is important when we discuss the implementation for thedeloperator.

Another interesting aspect of the implementation ofTreeNodeinthe code shown belowis that we use C++’s optional parameters. Optional parameters make it easy for us to create aTreeNodeunder several different circumstances. Sometimes we will want to construct a newTreeNodethat already has both aparentand achild. With an existing parent and child, we can pass parent and child as parameters. At other times we will just create aTreeNodewith the key value pair, and we will not pass any parameters forparentorchild. In this case, the default values of the optional parameters are used.
class TreeNode{
public:
int key;
string payload;
TreeNode *leftChild;
TreeNode *rightChild;
TreeNode *parent;

TreeNode(int key, string val, TreeNode *parent = NULL, TreeNode *left = NULL, TreeNode *right = NULL){
this->key = key;
this->payload = val;
this->leftChild = left;
this->rightChild = right;
this->parent = parent;
}

TreeNode *hasLeftChild(){
return this->leftChild;
}

TreeNode *hasRightChild(){
return this->rightChild;
}

bool isLeftChild(){
return this->parent && this->parent->leftChild == this;
}

bool isRightChild(){
return this->parent && this->parent->rightChild == this;
}

bool isRoot(){
return !this->parent;
}

bool isLeaf(){
return !(this->rightChild || this->leftChild);
}

bool hasAnyChildren(){
return this->rightChild || this->leftChild;
}

bool hasBothChildren(){
return this->rightChild && this->leftChild;
}

void replaceNodeData(int key, string value, TreeNode *lc = NULL, TreeNode *rc = NULL){
this->key = key;
this->payload = value;
this->leftChild = lc;
this->rightChild = rc;
if (this->hasLeftChild()){
this->leftChild->parent = this;
}
if (this->hasRightChild()){
this->rightChild->parent = this;
}
}
}
Now that we have theBinarySearchTreeshell and theTreeNodeit is time to write theputmethod that will allow us to build our binary search tree. Theputmethod is a method of theBinarySearchTreeclass. This method will check to see if the tree already has a root. If there is not a root thenputwill create a newTreeNodeand install it as the root of the tree. If a root node is already in place thenputcalls the private, recursive, helper function_putto search the tree according to the following algorithm:

Starting at the root of the tree, search the binary tree comparing the new key to the key in the current node. If the new key is less than the current node, search the left subtree. If the new key is greater than the current node, search the right subtree.

When there is no left (or right) child to search, we have found the position in the tree where the new node should be installed.

To add a node to the tree, create a newTreeNodeobject and insert the object at the point discovered in the previous step.

The code below shows the C++ code for inserting a new node in the tree. The_putfunction is written recursively following the steps outlined above. Notice that when a new child is inserted into the tree, thecurrentNodeis passed to the new tree as the parent.

One important problem with our implementation of insert is that duplicate keys are not handled properly. As our tree is implemented a duplicate key will create a new node with the same key value in the right subtree of the node having the original key. The result of this is that the node with the new key will never be found during a search. A better way to handle the insertion of a duplicate key is for the value associated with the new key to replace the old value. We leave fixing this bug as an exercise for you.
voidput(intkey,stringval){if(this->root){this->_put(key,val,this->root);}else{this->root=newTreeNode(key,val);}this->size=this->size+1;}void_put(intkey,stringval,TreeNode*currentNode){if(key<currentNode->key){if(currentNode->hasLeftChild()){this->_put(key,val,currentNode->leftChild);}else{currentNode->leftChild=newTreeNode(key,val,currentNode);}}else{if(currentNode->hasRightChild()){this->_put(key,val,currentNode->rightChild);}else{currentNode->rightChild=newTreeNode(key,val,currentNode);}}}
Figure 2illustrates the process for inserting a new node into a binary search tree. The lightly shaded nodes indicate the nodes that were visited during the insertion process.

Figure 2: Inserting a Node with Key = 19

Once the tree is constructed, the next task is to implement the retrieval of a value for a given key. Thegetmethod is even easier than theputmethod because it simply searches the tree recursively until it gets to a non-matching leaf node or finds a matching key. When a matching key is found, the value stored in the payload of the node is returned.

The code below shows the code forgetand_get. The search code in the_getmethod uses the same logic for choosing the left or right child as the_putmethod. Notice that the_getmethod returns aTreeNodetoget, this allows_getto be used as a flexible helper method for otherBinarySearchTreemethods that may need to make use of other data from theTreeNodebesides the payload.
string get(int key){
if (this->root){
TreeNode *res = this->_get(key, this->root);
if (res){
return res->payload;
}
else{
return 0;
}
}
else{
return 0;
}
}

TreeNode  *_get(int key, TreeNode *currentNode){
if (!currentNode){
return NULL;
}
else if (currentNode->key == key){
return currentNode;
}
else if (key < currentNode->key){
return this->_get(key, currentNode->leftChild);
}
else{
return this->_get(key, currentNode->rightChild);
}
}
Finally, we turn our attention to the most challenging method in the binary search tree, the deletion of a key (see the code below). The first task is to find the node to delete by searching the tree. If the tree has more than one node we search using the _get method to find the TreeNode that needs to be removed. If the tree only has a single node, that means we are removing the root of the tree, but we still must check to make sure the key of the root matches the key that is to be deleted. In either case if the key is not found the del operator raises an error.
voiddel(intkey){if(this->size>1){TreeNode*nodeToRemove=this->_get(key,this->root);if(nodeToRemove){this->remove(nodeToRemove);this->size=this->size-1;}else{cerr<<"Error, key not in tree"<<endl;}}elseif(this->size==1&&this->root->key==key){this->root=NULL;this->size=this->size-1;}else{cerr<<"Error, key not in tree"<<endl;}}
Once we’ve found the node containing the key we want to delete, there are three cases that we must consider:

The node to be deleted has no children (seeFigure 3).

The node to be deleted has only one child (seeFigure 4).

The node to be deleted has two children (seeFigure 5).

The first case is straightforward (seethe code below). If the current node has no children all we need to do is delete the node and remove the reference to this node in the parent. The code for this case is shown in here.

if(currentNode->isLeaf()){//leafif(currentNode==currentNode->parent->leftChild){currentNode->parent->leftChild=NULL;}else{currentNode->parent->rightChild=NULL;}}

Figure 3: Deleting Node 16, a Node without Children

The second case is only slightly more complicated (seethe code below). If a node has only a single child, then we can simply promote the child to take the place of its parent. The code for this case is shown in the next listing. As you look at this code you will see that there are six cases to consider. Since the cases are symmetric with respect to either having a left or right child we will just discuss the case where the current node has a left child. The decision proceeds as follows:

If the current node is a left child then we only need to update the parent reference of the left child to point to the parent of the current node, and then update the left child reference of the parent to point to the current node’s left child.

If the current node is a right child then we only need to update the parent reference of the left child to point to the parent of the current node, and then update the right child reference of the parent to point to the current node’s left child.

If the current node has no parent, it must be the root. In this case we will just replace thekey,payload,leftChild, andrightChilddata by calling thereplaceNodeDatamethod on the root.
else{//thisnodehasonechildif(currentNode->hasLeftChild()){if(currentNode->isLeftChild()){currentNode->leftChild->parent=currentNode->parent;currentNode->parent->leftChild=currentNode->leftChild;}elseif(currentNode->isRightChild()){currentNode->leftChild->parent=currentNode->parent;currentNode->parent->rightChild=currentNode->leftChild;}else{currentNode->replaceNodeData(currentNode->leftChild->key,currentNode->leftChild->payload,currentNode->leftChild->leftChild,currentNode->leftChild->rightChild);}}else{if(currentNode->isLeftChild()){currentNode->rightChild->parent=currentNode->parent;currentNode->parent->leftChild=currentNode->rightChild;}elseif(currentNode->isRightChild()){currentNode->rightChild->parent=currentNode->parent;currentNode->parent->rightChild=currentNode->rightChild;}else{currentNode->replaceNodeData(currentNode->rightChild->key,currentNode->rightChild->payload,currentNode->rightChild->leftChild,currentNode->rightChild->rightChild);}}}

Figure 4: Deleting Node 25, a Node That Has a Single Child<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/SearchTreeImplementation.html#id4>

The third case is the most difficult case to handle (seethe code above). If a node has two children, then it is unlikely that we can simply promote one of them to take the node’s place. We can, however, search the tree for a node that can be used to replace the one scheduled for deletion. What we need is a node that will preserve the binary search tree relationships for both of the existing left and right subtrees. The node that will do this is the node that has the next-largest key in the tree. We call this node thesuccessor, and we will look at a way to find the successor shortly. The successor is guaranteed to have no more than one child, so we know how to remove it using the two cases for deletion that we have already implemented. Once the successor has been removed, we simply put it in the tree in place of the node to be deleted.

Figure 5: Deleting Node 5, a Node with Two Children<https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/cppds/Trees/SearchTreeImplementation.html#id5>

The code to handle the third case is shown in the next listing. Notice that we make use of the helper methodsfindSuccessorandfindMinto find the successor. To remove the successor, we make use of the methodspliceOut. The reason we usespliceOutis that it goes directly to the node we want to splice out and makes the right changes. We could calldeleterecursively, but then we would waste time re-searching for the key node.

elseif(currentNode->hasBothChildren()){//interiorTreeNode*succ=currentNode->findSuccessor();succ->spliceOut();currentNode->key=succ->key;currentNode->payload=succ->payload;}

The code to find the successor is shown below (seethe code below) and as you can see is a method of theTreeNodeclass. This code makes use of the same properties of binary search trees that cause an inorder traversal to print out the nodes in the tree from smallest to largest. There are three cases to consider when looking for the successor:

If the node has a right child, then the successor is the smallest key in the right subtree.

If the node has no right child and is the left child of its parent, then the parent is the successor.

If the node is the right child of its parent, and itself has no right child, then the successor to this node is the successor of its parent, excluding this node.

The first condition is the only one that matters for us when deleting a node from a binary search tree. However, thefindSuccessormethod has other uses that we will explore in the exercises at the end of this chapter.

ThefindMinmethod is called to find the minimum key in a subtree. You should convince yourself that the minimum valued key in any binary search tree is the leftmost child of the tree. Therefore thefindMinmethod simply follows theleftChildreferences in each node of the subtree until it reaches a node that does not have a left child.
TreeNode*findSuccessor(){TreeNode*succ=NULL;if(this->hasRightChild()){succ=this->rightChild->findMin();}else{if(this->parent){if(this->isLeftChild()){succ=this->parent;}else{this->parent->rightChild=NULL;succ=this->parent->findSuccessor();this->parent->rightChild=this;}}}returnsucc;}TreeNode*findMin(){TreeNode*current=this;while(current->hasLeftChild()){current=current->leftChild;}returncurrent;}voidspliceOut(){if(this->isLeaf()){if(this->isLeftChild()){this->parent->leftChild=NULL;}else{this->parent->rightChild=NULL;}}elseif(this->hasAnyChildren()){if(this->hasLeftChild()){if(this->isLeftChild()){this->parent->leftChild=this->leftChild;}else{this->parent->rightChild=this->rightChild;}this->leftChild->parent=this->parent;}else{if(this->isLeftChild()){this->parent->leftChild=this->rightChild;}else{this->parent->rightChild=this->rightChild;}this->rightChild->parent=this->parent;}}}
We need to look at one last interface method for the binary search tree. Suppose that we would like to simply iterate over all the keys in the tree in order. This is definitely something we have done with dictionaries, so why not trees? You already know how to traverse a binary tree in order, using theinordertraversal algorithm. However, writing an iterator requires a bit more work, since an iterator should return only one node each time the iterator is called.

Python provides us with a very powerful function to use when creating an iterator. The function is calledyield.yieldis similar toreturnin that it returns a value to the caller. However,yieldalso takes the additional step of freezing the state of the function so that the next time the function is called it continues executing from the exact point it left off earlier. Functions that create objects that can be iterated are called generator functions.

The code for aninorderiterator of a binary tree is shown in the next listing. Look at this code carefully; at first glance you might think that the code is not recursive. However, remember that__iter__overrides theforxinoperation for iteration, so it really is recursive! Because it is recursive overTreeNodeinstances the__iter__method is defined in theTreeNodeclass.

def__iter__(self):ifself:ifself.hasLeftChild():foreleminself.leftChiLd:yieldelemyieldself.keyifself.hasRightChild():foreleminself.rightChild:yieldelem

At this point you may want to download the entire file containing the full version of theBinarySearchTreeandTreeNodeclasses.

[BST.cpp](https://tip.instructure.com/courses/56136/files/25722026/download?verifier=me18jSow1oFxV4p9rNzDtPTigBKOJQhw3GdVSzP1&wrap=1)

"Problem Solving with Algorithms and Data Structures using C++" by Bradley N. Miller, David L. Ranum, and Janice L. Pearce is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.