Recursion
Recursion is the process of defining a problem (or the solution to a problem) in terms of (a simpler version of) itself.

For example, we can define the operation "find your way home" as:

If you are at home, stop moving.

Take one step toward home.

"find your way home".

Here the solution to finding your way home is two steps (three steps). First, we don't go home if we are already home. Secondly, we do a very simple action that makes our situation simpler to solve. Finally, we redo the entire algorithm.
Parts of a Recursive Algorithm
All recursive algorithms must have the following:

Base Case (i.e., when to stop)

Work toward Base Case

Recursive Call (i.e., call ourselves)

The "work toward base case" is where we make the problem simpler (e.g., divide list into two parts, each smaller than the original). The recursive call, is where we use the same algorithm to solve a simpler version of the problem. The base case is the solution to the "simplest" possible problem (For example, the base case in the problem 'find the largest number in a list' would be if the list had only one number... and by definition if there is only one number, it is the largest).
Why Recursion Works
In a recursive algorithm, the computer "remembers" every previous state of the problem. This information is "held" by the computer on the "activation stack" (i.e., inside of each functions workspace).

Every function has its own workspace PER CALL of the function.
Brute Forcing
The first algorithmic technique we’ll use is the brute force technique. This is the algorithmic technique that most of us are most familiar with, even if we don’t realize it.

Simply put, a brute force algorithm will try all possible solutions to the problem, only stopping when it finds one that is the actual solution. A great example of a brute force algorithm in action is plugging in a USB cable. Many times, we will try one way, and if that doesn’t work, flip it over and try the other. Likewise, if we have a large number of keys but are unsure which one fits in a particular lock, we can just try each key until one works. That’s the essence of the brute force approach to algorithmic design.
Example:

A great example of a brute force algorithm is finding the closest pair of points in a multidimensional space. This could be as simple as finding the two closest cities on a map, or the two closest stars in a galaxy.

To find the answer, a brute force approach would be to simply calculate the distance between each individual pair of points, and then keep track of the minimum distance found. A pseudocode version of this algorithm would be similar to the following.
MINIMUM = infinity
POINT1 = none
POINT2 = none
loop each POINTA in POINTS
loop each POINTB in POINTS
if POINTA != POINTB
DISTANCE = COMPUTE_DISTANCE(POINTA, POINTB)
if DISTANCE < MINIMUM
MINIMUM = DISTANCE
POINT1 = POINTA
POINT2 = POINTB
end if
end if
end loop
end loop
Looking at this code, if we have N points, it would take N^2 steps to solve the problem! That’s not very efficient, event for a small data set. However, the code itself is really simple, and it is guaranteed to find exactly the best answer, provided we have enough time and a powerful enough computer to run the program.

Sources:

[https://www.cs.utah.edu/~germain/PPS/Topics/recursion.html#:~:text=Recursion%20is%20the%20process%20of,%22find%20your%20way%20home%22](https://www.cs.utah.edu/~germain/PPS/Topics/recursion.html#:~:text=Recursion%20is%20the%20process%20of,%22find%20your%20way%20home%22)

[https://textbooks.cs.ksu.edu/cc310/4-data-structures-and-algorithms/12-brute-force/](https://textbooks.cs.ksu.edu/cc310/4-data-structures-and-algorithms/12-brute-force/)