A Way of Thinking

Unlike specific coding syntax or design patterns, dynamic programming isn’t a particular algorithm but away of thinking. Therefore, the technique takes many forms when it comes to implementation.

The main idea of[dynamic programming](https://www.waynewbishop.com/dynamic-programming-problems)is to consider a significant problem and break it into smaller, individualized components. When it comes to implementation, optimal techniques rely on data storage and reuse to increase algorithm efficiency. As we’ll see, many questions in software development are solved using various forms of dynamic programming. The trick is recognizing when optimal solutions can be devised using a simple variable or require a sophisticated data structure or algorithm.

For example, code variables can be considered an elementary form of dynamic programming. As we know, a variable’s purpose is to reserve a specific place in memory for a value to be recalled later.
//non-memoized functionfuncaddNumbers(lhs: Int, rhs: Int) -> Int {
return lhs + rhs
}

//memoized functionfuncaddNumbersMemo(lhs: Int, rhs: Int) -> Int {
let result: Int = lhs + rhs
return result
}

WhileaddNumbersMemoabove does provide a simple introduction, the goal of a dynamic programming solution is to preserve previously seen values because the alternative could either be inefficient or could prevent you from answering the question. This design technique is known asmemoization.
A brute force approach
Our first approach involves looking at the first value, then reviewing each subsequent value to determine if it will provide thedifferenceneeded to solve the question. For example, once our algorithm checks the value of the first array item, 8, it will then scan the remaining values for 3 (e.g., 11 – 8 = 3). However, we can see the value of 3 doesn’t exist, so the algorithm will repeat the same process for the next value (in our case, 10) until it finds a successful matching pair. Without going into the details of big-O notation, we can assume this type of solution would have an average runtime of O(n ^ 2)time or greater, mainly because our algorithm works by comparing each value with every other value. In code, this can be represented as follows:
let sequence = [8, 10, 2, 9, 7, 5]

//non-memoized version - O(n ^ 2)funcpairNumbers(sum: Int) -> (Int, Int) {

for a in sequence {
let diff = sum - a

for b in sequence {
if (b != a) && (b == diff) {
return (a, b)
}
}
}
return (0, 0)
}
A memoized approach
Next, let’s try a different approach using the idea of memoization. Before implementing our code, we can brainstorm how storing previously seen values will help streamline the process. While using a standard array is feasible, a set collection object (also referred to as a hash table or hash map) could provide an optimized solution.
//memoized version - O(n + d)
func pairNumbersMemoized(sum: Int) -> (Int, Int) {

var addends = Set<Int>()

for a in sequence {
let diff = sum - a

if addends.contains(diff) { //O(1) - constant time lookupreturn (a, diff)
}
//store previously seen valueelse {
addends.insert(a)
}
}

return (0, 0)
}

Using a memoized approach, we’ve improved the algorithm’s average run time efficiency to O(n + d) by adding previously seen values to a set collection object. Those familiar with hash-based structures will know that item insert and retrieval occurs in O(1) – constant time. This further streamlines the solution, as the set is designed to retrieve values in an optimized way regardless of size.
Conclusion
We’ve learned that dynamic programming isn’t a specific design pattern as it is a way of thinking. Its goal is to create a solution to preserve previously seen values to increase time efficiency. While examples include basic algorithms, dynamic programming provides a foundation in almost all programs. This includes the use of simple variables and complex data structures.

Source:

[https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs97si/04-dynamic-programming.pdf](https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs97si/04-dynamic-programming.pdf)

[https://stackoverflow.blog/2022/01/31/the-complete-beginners-guide-to-dynamic-programming/](https://stackoverflow.blog/2022/01/31/the-complete-beginners-guide-to-dynamic-programming/)