Arrays
In C++, an array is a collection of items stored in contiguous memory locations, with elements accessible at random using the array's indices.

They are used to hold similar types of elements, i.e., the data type for all components must be the same.

Arrays can be used to store the collection of primitive data types such as int, float, double, char, etc of any particular type.
Additionally, an array in C or C++ can store derived types such as structures, pointers, and etc.
Why do we need arrays?
Instead of using independent variables, we use an array to store a large number of instances since single variables become difficult to manage.
It helps in the representation of multiple instances into one variable.
Array Declaration
In this image, we can see the different array declaration methods in C/C++.

a. Array declaration by specifying size
int arr1[10];
int n = 10;
int arr2[n];
b. Array declaration by initializing elements
int arr[] = {10, 20, 30, 40};
c. Array declaration by specifying the size and initializing elements
int arr[6] = {10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60};Advantages and Disadvantages of using Arrays in C/C++AdvantagesDisadvantages
Allows for random access of array elements using the array index.

Implementing an array with multiple elements uses fewer lines of code.

Array elements are easily accessed.

A single loop can be used to traverse the elements in the array.

Fewer lines of code are necessary to perform sorting operations.

An array is not dynamic. It only allows for a fixed number of elements to be input, decided at the time of its declaration.

Relatively costly insertion and deletion of array elements. Contents have to be managed considering new memory allocation.

Attribution: C++ Pointers. (2020, August 21). Retrieved from https://eng.libretexts.org/@go/page/34645