Dynamic Memory Allocation
In C/C++, dynamic memory allocation refers to performing allocation manually by the programmer.

Dynamically allocated memory is allocated on the heap.

Non-static and local variables get memory allocated on the stack.

The most important use of dynamically allocated memory is that it provides flexibility to programmers. The freedom to allocate and deallocate memory whenever needed, or otherwise. These freedoms are not possible with compiler-allocated memory, except in the case of variable-length arrays.

Memory is automatically allocated: int a, char str[10], etc.

Dynamically allocated memory: int *p = new int[10]
Programmers are responsible for deallocating the memory when no longer needed.

Failure to deallocate will lead to a memory leak.

new operator
A request for memory allocation on the Free Store is denoted by the new operator. The new operator allocates memory and returns the address of the newly allocated and initialized memory to the pointer variable if enough memory is available.

If we want to allocate new memory, we follow the syntax:
pointer-variable = new data-type;
The pointer variable is the pointer of the type data type. Note that data type can be any built-in data type including array or any user-defined data type including structure and class.

Example:
//pointer initialized with NULL
//then request memory for the variable
int *p = NULL;
p = new int;

OR

//combine the declaration of the pointer and its assignment
int *p = new int;
We can also initialize memory with the new operator.
//pointer-variable = new data-type(value);
int *p = new int (25);
float *q = new float(75.25);
The new operator is also used to allocate a block (or an array) of memory type data type.
pointer-variable = new data-type[size];
//in this syntax, note that the size(a variable) specifies the number of elements in an array.
int *p = new int[10];
In the above example, we allocate memory for 10 integers continues of type int and returns a pointer to the first element of the sequence, which is assigned top (a pointer).

p[0] refers to the first element, p[1] refers to the second element, and so on.
delete operator
The programmer is responsible for deallocating dynamically allocated memory, so the C++ language has provided the delete operator.

Syntax:
//relase memory pointed by pointer-variable
delete pointer-variable
The pointer-variable refers to the pointer that points to the data object that was created by new.

Examples:
delete p;
delete q;
We use the following form of delete to free the dynamically allocated array pointed to by the pointer variable.
//release block of memory
delete[] pointer-variable;

//actual use
delete[] p;
Attribution: C++ Pointers. (2020, August 21). Retrieved from https://eng.libretexts.org/@go/page/34645