The process of database design is iterative rather than a linear or sequential process. The verb iterate means “to do again or repeatedly.” Thus, an iterative process is based on repetition of processes and procedures. Building an ERD usually involves the following activities:

Create a detailed narrative of the organization’s description of operations.

Identify the business rules based on the description of operations.

Identify the main entities and relationships from the business rules.

Develop the initial ERD.

Identify the attributes and primary keys that adequately describe the entities.

Revise and review the ERD.

To illustrate the use of the iterative process that ultimately yields a workable ERD, start with an initial interview with the Tiny College administrators. The interview process yields the following business rules:

Tiny College (TC) is divided into several schools: business, arts and sciences, education, and applied sciences. Each school is administered by a dean who is a professor. Each professor can be the dean of only one school, and a professor is not required to be the dean of any school. Therefore, a 1:1 relationship exists between PROFESSOR and SCHOOL. Note that the cardinality can be expressed by writing (1,1) next to the entity PROFESSOR and (0,1) next to the entity SCHOOL.

Each school comprises several departments. For example, the school of business has an accounting department, a management/marketing department, an economics/ finance department, and a computer information systems department. Note again the cardinality rules: The smallest number of departments operated by a school is one, and the largest number of departments is indeterminate (N). On the other hand, each department belongs to only a single school; thus, the cardinality is expressed by (1,1). That is, the minimum number of schools to which a department belongs is one, as is the maximum number. Figure 1 illustrates these first two business rules.

Figure 1. The First Tiny College ERD Segment

3. Each department may offer courses. For example, the management/marketing department offers courses such as Introduction to Management, Principles of Marketing, and Production Management. The ERD segment for this condition is shown in Figure 2. Note that this relationship is based on the way Tiny College operates. For example, if Tiny College had some departments that were classified as “research only,” they would not offer courses; therefore, the COURSE entity would be optional to the DEPARTMENT entity.

Figure 2. The Second Tiny College ERD Segment

4. The relationship between COURSE and CLASS was illustrated in the previous module. Nevertheless, it is worth repeating that a CLASS is a section of a COURSE. That is, a department may offer several sections (classes) of the same database course. Each of those classes is taught by a professor at a given time in a given place. In short, a 1:M relationship exists between COURSE and CLASS. Additionally, each class is offered during a given semester. SEMESTER defines the year and the term that the class will be offered. Note that this is different from the date when the student actually enrolls in a class. For example, students are able to enroll in summer and fall term classes near the end of the spring term. It is possible that the Tiny College calendar is set with semester beginning and ending dates prior to the creation of the semester class schedule so CLASS is optional to SEMESTER. This design will also help for reporting purposes, for example, you could answer questions such as: what classes were offered X semester? Or, what classes did student Y take on semester X? Because a course may exist in Tiny College’s course catalog even when it is not offered as a class in a given semester, CLASS is optional to COURSE. Therefore, the relationships between SEMESTER, COURSE, and CLASS look like Figure 3.

Figure 3. The Third Tiny College ERD Segment

5. Each department should have one or more professors assigned to it. One and only one of those professors chairs the department, and no professor is required to accept the chair position. Therefore, DEPARTMENT is optional to PROFESSOR in the “chairs” relationship. Those relationships are summarized in the ER segment shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. The Fourth Tiny College ERD Segment

6. Each professor may teach up to four classes; each class is a section of a course. A professor may also be on a research contract and teach no classes at all. The ERD segment in Figure 5 depicts those conditions.

Figure 5. The Fifth Tiny College ERD Segment

7. A student may enroll in several classes but take each class only once during any given enrollment period. For example, during the current enrollment period, a student may decide to take five classes—Statistics, Accounting, English, Database, and History— but that student would not be enrolled in the same Statistics class five times during the enrollment period! Each student may enroll in up to six classes, and each class may have up to 35 students, thus creating an M:N relationship between STUDENT and CLASS. Because a CLASS can initially exist at the start of the enrollment period even though no students have enrolled in it, STUDENT is optional to CLASS in the M:N relationship. This M:N relationship must be divided into two 1:M relationships through the use of the ENROLL entity, shown in the ERD segment in Figure 5. However, note that the optional symbol is shown next to ENROLL. If a class exists but has no students enrolled in it, that class does not occur in the ENROLL table. Note also that the ENROLL entity is weak: it is existence-dependent, and its (composite) PK is composed of the PKs of the STUDENT and CLASS entities. You can add the cardinalities (0,6) and (0,35) next to the ENROLL entity to reflect the business rule constraints, as shown in Figure 6. (Visio Professional does not automatically generate such cardinalities, but you can use a text box to accomplish that task.)

Figure 6. The Sixth Tiny College ERD Segment

8. Each department has several (or many) students whose major is offered by that department. However, each student has only a single major and is therefore associated with a single department. (See Figure 7.) However, in the Tiny College environment, it is possible—at least for a while—for a student not to declare a major field of study. Such a student would not be associated with a department; therefore, DEPARTMENT is optional to STUDENT. It is worth repeating that the relationships between entities and the entities themselves reflect the organization’s operating environment. That is, the business rules define the ERD components.

Figure 7. The Seventh Tiny College ERD Segment

9. Each student has an advisor in his or her department; each advisor counsels several students. An advisor is also a professor, but not all professors advise students. Therefore, STUDENT is optional to PROFESSOR in the “PROFESSOR advises STUDENT” relationship. (See Figure 8.)

Figure 8. The Eight Tiny College ERD Segment

10. As you can see in Figure 9, the CLASS entity contains a ROOM_CODE attribute. Given the naming conventions, it is clear that ROOM_CODE is an FK to another entity. Clearly, because a class is taught in a room, it is reasonable to assume that the ROOM_CODE in CLASS is the FK to an entity named ROOM. In turn, each room is located in a building. So, the last Tiny College ERD is created by observing that a BUILDING can contain many ROOMs, but each ROOM is found in a single BUILDING. In this ERD segment, it is clear that some buildings do not contain (class) rooms. For example, a storage building might not contain any named rooms at all.

Figure 9. The Ninth Tiny College ERD Segment

Once you have discovered the relevant entities, you can define the initial set of relationships among them. Next, you describe the entity attributes. Identifying the attributes of the entities helps you to better understand the relationships among entities. Table 1 summarizes the ERM’s components, and names the entities and their relations.

Table 1. Components of the ERM

You must also define the connectivity and cardinality for the just-discovered relations based on the business rules. However, to avoid crowding the diagram, the cardinalities are not shown. Figure 10 shows the Crow’s Foot ERD for Tiny College. Note that this is an implementation-ready model, so it shows the ENROLL composite entity.

Figure 10. The Completed Tiny College ERD

Figure 11. The Conceptual UML Class Diagram for Tiny College