Database designers must often make design compromises that are triggered by conflicting goals, such as adherence to design standards (design elegance), processing speed, and information requirements.

Design standards. The database design must conform to design standards. Such standards guide you in developing logical structures that minimize data redundancies, thereby minimizing the likelihood that destructive data anomalies will occur. You have also learned how standards prescribe avoiding nulls to the greatest extent possible.

Processing speed. In many organizations, particularly those that generate large numbers of transactions, high processing speeds are often a top priority in database design. High processing speed means minimal access time, which may be achieved by minimizing the number and complexity of logically desirable relationships. For example, a “perfect” design might use a 1:1 relationship to avoid nulls, while a design that emphasizes higher transaction speed might combine the two tables to avoid the use of an additional relationship, using dummy entries to avoid the nulls. If the focus is on data-retrieval speed, you might also be forced to include derived attributes in the design.

Information requirements. The quest for timely information might be the focus of database design. Complex information requirements may dictate data transformations, and they may expand the number of entities and attributes within the design. Therefore, the database may have to sacrifice some of its “clean” design structures and high transaction speed to ensure maximum information generation