Since we are really measuring growthrates, we usually ignore:

all but the “largest” term, and

any constant multipliers

so for example

behaves asymptotically liken5

behaves asymptotically likenlogn

The justification for doing this is

The difference between6nand3nisn’t meaningful when looking at algorithms abstractly, since getting a computer that is twice as fast makes the former look like the latter.

The difference between2nand2n+8is insignificant asngets larger and larger.

If you are comparing the growth rates of, say,λn.n3andλn.kn2, the former will always eventually overtake the latter no matter how big you makekk.

How can we formalize this? That is, how do we formalize things like “the set of all quadratic functions” or the “set of all cubic functions” or “the set of all logarithmic functions”?
Big-O: Asymptotic Upper Bounds
A functionfis inO(g)whenever there exist constantscandNsuch that for everyn>N,f(n)is bounded above by a constant timesg(n). Formally:

This means thatO(g)is the set of all functions for whichgis anasymptotic upper boundoff.
Examples

Notation: By convention, people usually drop the lambdas when writing expressions involving Big-O, so you will see things like.
Does this really let us throw away constant factors and small terms?
Well let’s see why we should be able to, but only argue with one special case. (You can do the formal proof on your own.) Let’s show that . We have to choose c and N. Let’s choose c=30 and N=1. So since n ≥ 1:

Is Big-O Useful?
Big-O notation is really only most useful for largen. The suppression of low-order terms and leading constants is misleading for smalln. Be careful of functions such as

Large constants on the more significant terms signifyoverhead, for example when comparing  and  note that the former is worse untilnngets up to 10,710.

Sedgewick writes "[Big-O analysis] must be considered the very first step in a progressive process of refining the analysis of an algorithm to reveal more details about its properties."

Big-O is only an upperbound; it is not a tight upperbound. If an algorithm is inO(n^2)it is also inO(n^3),O(n^100), andO(2^n). So it’s not really right to say that all complexity functions inO(2^n)are terrible, because that set properly includes the setO(1).

Source: https://cs.lmu.edu/~ray/notes/alganalysis/