How to Implement a Stack
There are two ways to implement a stack:

Using array
Pros: Easy to implement. Memory is saved as pointers are not involved.

Cons: It is not dynamic. It doesn’t grow and shrink depending on needs at runtime.

Using linked list
Pros: The linked list implementation of stack can grow and shrink according to the needs at runtime.

Cons: Requires extra memory due to involvement of pointers.

We will look at using a Linked list to implement a Stack. Most of what we need to know we have already covered in our discussion of Linked Lists - stacks really only need a 'push' to build the stack. However, there are a couple of pieces that we need to add. In the "stack terminology" we have a 'pop' capability, which is just like the delete in our linked list. We also need to implement the 'peek' functionality - this simply returns the value that is sitting on the top of the stack, but does not alter the stack in any way. Lastly we will have to be able to determine if the stack is empty.
A. Implementing Stack using Arrays
The stack implementation using arrays is good because it's easy to implement and memory is saved due to the absence of pointers. However, it is not dynamic. The size is fixed at runtime (i.e., it doesn't shrink or grow).
/* C++ program to implement basic stack
operations */
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

#define MAX 1000
class Stack {
int top;
public:
int a[MAX]; // Maximum size of Stack
Stack() { top = -1; }
bool push(int x);
int pop();
int peek();
bool isEmpty();
};

bool Stack::push(int x)
{
if (top >= (MAX - 1)) {
cout << "Stack Overflow";
return false;
}
else {
a[++top] = x;
cout << x << " pushed into stack\n";
return true;
}
}

int Stack::pop()
{
if (top < 0) {
cout << "Stack Underflow";
return 0;
}
else {
int x = a[top--];
return x;
}
}

int Stack::peek()
{
if (top < 0) {
cout << "Stack is Empty";
return 0;
}
else {
int x = a[top];
return x;
}
}

bool Stack::isEmpty()
{
return (top < 0);
}

// Driver program to test above functions
int main()
{
class Stack s;
s.push(10);
s.push(20);
s.push(30);
cout << s.pop() << " Popped from stack\n";

//print all elements in stack :
cout<<"Elements present in stack : ";

while(!s.isEmpty())
{
// print top element in stack
cout<<s.peek()<<" ";
// remove top element in stack
s.pop();
}
return 0;
}B. Implementing Stack using Linked List
The linked list implementation, compared to the array, can shrink or grow according to the needs at runtime. However, this means that due to the use of pointers, it requires extra memory.

// C++ program for linked list implementation of stack
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

// A structure to represent a stack
class StackNode {

public:
int data;
StackNode* next;
};

StackNode* newNode(int data)
{
StackNode* stackNode = new StackNode();
stackNode->data = data;
stackNode->next = NULL;
return stackNode;
}

int isEmpty(StackNode* root)
{
return !root;
}

void push(StackNode** root, int data)
{
StackNode* stackNode = newNode(data);
stackNode->next = *root;
*root = stackNode;
cout << data << " pushed to stack\n";
}

int pop(StackNode** root)
{
if (isEmpty(*root))
return INT_MIN;
StackNode* temp = *root;
*root = (*root)->next;
int popped = temp->data;
free(temp);
return popped;
}

int peek(StackNode* root)
{
if (isEmpty(root))
return INT_MIN;
return root->data;
}

// Driver code
int main()
{
StackNode* root = NULL;
push(&root, 10);
push(&root, 20);
push(&root, 30);

cout << pop(&root) << " popped from stack\n";
cout << "Top element is " << peek(root) << endl;
cout<<"Elements present in stack : ";

//print all elements in stack :
while(!isEmpty(root))
{
// print top element in stack
cout<<peek(root)<<" ";
// remove top element in stack
pop(&root);
}
return 0;
}

Attribution: " Stack Data Structure" by Patrick McClanahan, LibreTexts is licensed under CC BY-SA .