Stack Applications
Stacks are useful for any application requiring LIFO storage. There are many, many of these. Such as:

parsing context-free languages

evaluating arithmetic expressions

function call management

traversing trees and graphs

recursion removal

Example: A Language Consisting of Balanced Brackets
A stack can be used to recognize strings from the language of balanced brackets. Brackets are either parentheses, curly braces, square brackets, angle brackets, or any other pair of characters designated to be left and right matches of each other, as well as characters that are not brackets of any kind. Brackets are balanced when they are used in matching pairs. To be precise, the following grammar defines a language of balanced brackets whose alphabet is the four different types of brackets and the letter a. The word
"NULLSTRING" means the string with no characters in it.
word       = identifier
| NULLSTRING
| word word
| (word) | <word> | [word] | {word}
identifier = a
The grammar generates the null string of course, as well as the word with the single letter 'a', you can check that the following two-character words are also in the language that this grammar generates:
() {} [] <>
because there are derivations such as
word => (word) => (NULLSTRING) => ()
and similar ones for the other brackets. In general, this grammar generates words such as
aa(aa)[a(aaa)aaaaaa]aa{aa{aaa}{aa{aaa}}aa}
Intuitively, these are words that never have overlapping brackets such as [ ( ] ) or unmatched brackets such as (aaa.

The simplest bracket language has just a single type of bracket. Suppose we allow all lowercase letters into the alphabet but limit the brackets to curly braces. An example of a word with balanced braces is:
abc{defg{ijk}{l{mn}}op}qr
An example of a word with unbalanced braces is:
abc{def}}{ghij{kl}m
The following is an algorithm to recognize words in this language.

Recognizing means identifying which words are in the language and which are not.

A recognition algorithm returns either true or false, depending on whether the word is in the language.
initialize a new empty stack s whose entries hold a single character.
balanced = true;
while ( the end of the string has not been reached ) {
copy the next character of the string into ch;
if ( ch == "{" )
s.push(ch);
else if ( ch == "}") {
if s.empty()
return !balanced;
else
s.pop();
}
}
if s.empty()
return balanced;
else
return !balanced;
Of course this is a simple problem that can be solved with just a counter; increment the counter on reading a { and decrement on reading a }. If the counter is ever negative, it is not balanced. If it is not zero when the end of the string is reached, it is not balanced. Otherwise it is balanced.

Attribution: "Stacks and Their Application"  by Prof. Stewart Weiss. Licensed under CC BY-SA.