Problems with File System Data Processing

The fle system method of organizing and managing data was a definite improvement over the manual system, and the fle system served a useful purpose in data management for over two decades—a very long time in the computer era. Nonetheless, many problems and limitations became evident in this approach. A critique of the file system method serves two major purposes:

• Understanding the shortcomings of the fle system enables you to understand the development of modern databases.
• Many of the problems are not unique to fle systems. Failure to understand such problems is likely to lead to their duplication in a database environment, even though database technology makes it easy to avoid them.

The following problems associated with fle systems, whether created by DP specialists or through a series of spreadsheets, severely challenge the types of information that can be created from the data as well as the accuracy of the information:

Lengthy development times - The first and most glaring problem with the file system approach is that even the simplest data-retrieval task requires extensive programming. With the older file systems, programmers had to specify what must be done and how to do it. As you will learn in upcoming chapters, modern databases use a non-procedural data manipulation language that allows the user to specify what must be done without specifying how.

Difculty of getting quick answers - The need to write programs to produce even the simplest reports makes ad hoc queries impossible. Harried DP specialists who worked with mature file systems often received numerous requests for new reports. They were often forced to say that the report will be ready “next week” or even “next month.” If you need the information now, getting it next week or next month will not serve your information needs.

Complex system administration - System administration becomes more difficult as the number of files in the system expands. Even a simple file system with a few file requires creating and maintaining several file management programs. Each file must have its own file management programs that allow the user to add, modify, and delete records; to list the file contents; and to generate reports. Because ad hoc queries are not possible, the file reporting programs can multiply quickly. The problem is compounded by the fact that each department in the organization “owns” its data by creating its own flies.

Lack of security and limited data sharing - Another fault of a file system data repository is a lack of security and limited data sharing. Data sharing and security are closely related. Sharing data among multiple geographically dispersed users introduces a lot of security risks.

Extensive programming - Making changes to an existing file structure can be difficult
in a fle system environment. For example, changing just one field in the original
CUSTOMER file would require a program that:
1. Reads a record from the original file.
2. Transforms the original data to conform to the new structure’s storage requirements.
3. Writes the transformed data into the new file structure.
4. Repeats the preceding steps for each record in the original file

In fact, any change to a file structure, no matter how minor, forces modifications in all of the programs that use the data in that file. Modifications are likely to produce errors (bugs), and additional time is spent using a debugging process to find those errors. Those limitations, in turn, lead to problems of structural and data dependence

Structural and Data Dependence

A file system exhibits structural dependence, which means that access to a file is dependent on its structure.

For example, adding a customer date-of-birth field to the CUSTOMER file shown in Figure 1.6 would require the four steps described in the previous section. Given this change, none of the previous programs will work with the new CUSTOMER file structure.

Therefore, all of the file system programs must be modified to conform to the new file structure. In short, because the file system application programs are aﬀected by changes in the file structure, they exhibit structural dependence. Conversely, structural independence exists when you can change the file structure without aﬀecting the application’s ability to access the data.

Even changes in the characteristics of data, such as changing a field from integer to decimal, require changes in all the programs that access the file. Because all data access programs are subject to change when any of the file’s data storage characteristics change (that is, changing the data type), the fle system is said to exhibit data dependence. Conversely, data independence exists when you can change the data storage characteristics without aﬀecting the program’s ability to access the data.

Data Redundancy

The file system’s structure makes it difficult to combine data from multiple sources, and its lack of security renders the file system vulnerable to security breaches. Data redundancy exists when the same data is stored
unnecessarily at diﬀerent places.

Data redundancy exists when the same data is stored unnecessarily at diﬀerent places. Uncontrolled data redundancy sets the stage for the following:

Poor data security. Having multiple copies of data increases the chances for a copy of the data to be susceptible to unauthorized access.

Data inconsistency. Data inconsistency exists when diﬀerent and conﬂicting versions of the same data appear in diﬀerent places. For example, suppose you change an agent’s phone number in the AGENT file. If you forget to make the corresponding change in the CUSTOMER file, the fles contain diﬀerent data for the same agent. Reports will yield inconsistent results that depend on which version of the data is used.

Data-entry errors. Data-entry errors are more likely to occur when complex entries (such as 10-digit phone numbers) are made in several diﬀerent files or recur frequently in one or more fles. In fact, the CUSTOMER file shown in Figure 1.6 contains just such an entry error: the third record in the CUSTOMER fle has transposed digits in the agent’s phone number (615-882-2144 rather than 615-882-1244).

Data integrity problems. It is possible to enter a nonexistent sales agent’s name and phone number into the CUSTOMER file, but customers are not likely to be impressed if the insurance agency supplies the name and phone number of an agent who does not exist. Should the personnel manager allow a non-existent agent to accurate bonuses and benefits? In fact, a data-entry error such as an incorrectly spelled name or an incorrect phone number yields the same kind of data integrity problems.

Data Anomalies

The dictionary defines anomaly as “an abnormality.” Ideally, a field value change should be made in only a single place. Data redundancy, however, fosters an abnormal condition by forcing field value changes in many diﬀerent locations.

A data anomaly develops when not all of the required changes in the redundant data are made successfully. Te data anomalies found in Figure 1.6 are commonly defined as follows:

Update anomalies - If agent Leah F. Hahn has a new phone number, it must be entered in each of the CUSTOMER file records in which Ms. Hahn’s phone number is shown. In this case, only four changes must be made. In a large file system, such a change might occur in hundreds or even thousands of records. Clearly, the potential for data inconsistencies is great.

Insertion anomalies - If only the CUSTOMER fle existed and you needed to add a new agent, you would also add a dummy customer data entry to reﬂect the new agent’s addition. Again, the potential for creating data inconsistencies would be great.

Deletion anomalies. If you delete the customers Amy B. O’Brian, George Williams, and Olette K. Smith, you will also delete John T. Okon’s agent data. Clearly, this is not desirable.