Basically, a database is a carefully designed and constructed repository of facts. The database is part of a larger whole known as an information system, which provides for data collection, storage, transformation, and retrieval. The information system also helps transform data into information, and it allows for the management of both data and information. Thus, a complete information system is composed of people, hardware, sofware, the database(s), application programs, and procedures. Systems analysis is the process that establishes the need for an information system and its extent. The process of creating an information system is known as systems development,

This section is not intended to discuss systems analysis design as a whole but only to show to show how systems are generally developed according to the life cycle for the purpose of having an additional background on how you will be doing your final project.

The Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC) traces the history of an information system. Perhaps more important to the system designer, the SDLC provides the big picture within which the database design and application development can be mapped out and evaluated.

As illustrated in Figure 9.2, the traditional SDLC is divided into five phases: planning, analysis, detailed systems design, implementation, and maintenance. The SDLC is an iterative process rather than a sequential process.

For example, the details of the feasibility study might help refine the initial assessment, and the details discovered during the user requirements portion of the SDLC might help refine the feasibility study.

Planning

The SDLC planning phase yields a general overview of the company and its objectives. An initial assessment of the information ﬂow-and-extent requirements must be made during this discovery portion of the SDLC. Such an assessment should answer some important questions:

• Should the existing system be continued? If the information generator does its job well, there is no point in modifying or replacing it. To quote an old saying, “If it ain’t broke, don’t fx it.

• Should the existing system be modifed? If the initial assessment indicates defciencies
in the extent and ﬂow of the information, minor (or even major) modifcations might
be needed. When considering modifcations, the participants in the initial assessment
must remember the distinction between wants and needs.
• Should the existing system be replaced? The initial assessment might indicate that the
current system’s ﬂaws are beyond fxing. Given the eﬀort required to create a new system, a careful distinction between wants and needs is perhaps even more important
in this case than it is when modifying the system.

Analysis

Problems defned during the planning phase are examined in greater detail during the analysis phase. A macro analysis must be made both of individual needs and organizational needs, addressing questions such as:

• What are the requirements of the current system’s end users?
• Do those requirements ft into the overall information requirements?

The analysis phase of the SDLC is, in eﬀect, a thorough audit of user requirements. The existing hardware and sofware systems are also studied during the analysis phase. The result of the analysis should be a better understanding of the system’s functional areas, actual and potential problems, and opportunities.

After doing analysis you should be able to answer the question "What does the client actually need/require?" or "What are the need(s)/requirement(s) of the client?"

Detailed Systems Design

In the detailed systems design phase, the designer completes the design of the system’s processes. Te design includes all the necessary technical specifcations for the screens, menus, reports, and other devices that might help make the system a more efcient information generator. The steps are laid out for conversion from the old system to the new system. Training principles and methodologies are also planned and must be submitted
for management’s approval.

Implementation

During the implementation phase, the hardware, DBMS software, and application programs are installed, and the database design is implemented. During the initial stages of the implementation phase, the system enters into a cycle of coding, testing, and debugging until it is ready to be delivered. The actual database is created, and the system is customized by the creation of tables and views, user authorizations, and so on.

Maintenance

Almost as soon as the system is operational, end users begin to request changes in it. Those changes generate system maintenance activities, which can be grouped into three types:

• Corrective maintenance in response to systems errors
• Adaptive maintenance due to changes in the business environment
• Perfective maintenance to enhance the system

Because every request for structural change requires retracing the SDLC steps, thesystem is, in a sense, always at some stage of the SDLC.

This is just an overview that means you only need to absorb key take-aways such as planning, defining user requirements, specifying your actual system design (software application and the database), implementing it in the client (setup and installation), and finally maintenance(bug fixes, other updates).