The problems inherent in file systems make using a database system very desirable. Unlike the file system, with its many separate and unrelated fles, the database system consists of logically related data stored in a single logical data repository. (The “logical”label reﬂects the fact that the data repository appears to be a single unit to the end user, even though data might be physically distributed among multiple storage facilities and
locations.) Because the database’s data repository is a single logical unit, the database represents a major change in the way end-user data is stored, accessed, and managed.

The database’s DBMS, shown in Figure 1.9, provides numerous advantages over file system management, shown in Figure 1.8, by making it possible to eliminate most of the file system’s data inconsistency, data anomaly, data dependence, and structural dependence problems.

1. Differentiate a file system and a dbms.
2. Explain the problems in a file system which made rise to the popularity of the DBMS.

Better yet, the current generation of DBMS sofware stores not only the data structures, but also the relationships between those structures and the access paths to those structures—all in a central location. Te current generation of DBMS software also takes care of defining, storing, and managing all required access paths to those components.

The Database Systems Environment

The term database system refers to an organization of components that define and regulate the collection, storage, management, and use of data within a database environment. From a general management point of view, the database system is composed of the five major parts shown in Figure 1.10: hardware, software, people, procedures, and data.

Let’s take a closer look at the five components shown in Figure 1.10:

• Hardware. Hardware refers to all of the system’s physical devices, including computers (PCs, tablets, workstations, servers, and supercomputers), storage devices, printers, network devices (hubs, switches, routers, fber optics), and other devices (automated teller machines, ID readers, and so on).
• Sofware. Although the most readily identifed sofware is the DBMS itself, three types of sofware are needed to make the database system function fully: operating system sofware, DBMS sofware, and application programs and utilities.
– Operating system sofware manages all hardware components and makes it possible for all other sofware to run on the computers. Examples of operating system sofware include Microsof Windows, Linux, Mac OS, UNIX, and MVS

– DBMS sofware manages the database within the database system. Some examples of DBMS sofware include Microsof’s SQL Server, Oracle Corporation’s Oracle, Oracle’s MySQL, and IBM’s DB2.
– Application programs and utility sofware are used to access and manipulate data in the DBMS and to manage the computer environment in which data access and manipulation take place. Application programs are most commonly used to access data within the database to generate reports, tabulations, and other information to facilitate decision making. Utilities are the sofware tools used to help manage the database system’s computer components. For example, all of the major DBMS vendors now provide graphical user interfaces (GUIs) to help create database structures, control database access, and monitor database
operations.

• People. Tis component includes all users of the database system. On the basis of primary job functions, five types of users can be identifed in a database system: system administrators, database administrators, database designers, system analysts and programmers, and end users. Each user type, described next, performs both unique and complementary functions.
– System administrators oversee the database system’s general operations.
– Database administrators, also known as DBAs, manage the DBMS and ensure that the database is functioning properly.
– Database designers design the database structure. They are, in eﬀect, the database architects. If the database design is poor, even the best application programmers and the most dedicated DBAs cannot produce a useful database environment. Because organizations strive to optimize their data resources, the database designer’s job description has expanded to cover new dimensions and growing responsibilities.

• People. This component includes all users of the database system. On the basis of primary job functions, five types of users can be identified in a database system: system administrators, database administrators, database designers, system analysts and programmers, and end users. Each user type, described next, performs both unique and complementary functions.
– System administrators oversee the database system’s general operations.
– Database administrators, also known as DBAs, manage the DBMS and ensure that the database is functioning properly. The DBA’s role is sufficiently important to warrant a detailed exploration in Chapter 16, Database Administration and Security.
– Database designers design the database structure. They are, in eﬀect, the database architects. If the database design is poor, even the best application programmers and the most dedicated DBAs cannot  produce a useful database environment. Because organizations strive to optimize their data resources, the database designer’s job description has expanded to cover new dimensions and growing responsibilities.

• Procedures. Procedures are the instructions and rules that govern the design and use of the database system. Procedures are a critical, although occasionally forgotten, component of the system. Procedures play an important role in a company because they enforce the standards by which business is conducted within the organization and with customers. Procedures also help to ensure that companies have an organized way to monitor and audit the data that enter the database and the information generated from those data.
• Data. Te word data covers the collection of facts stored in the database. Because data is the raw material from which information is generated, determining which data to enter into the database and how to organize that data is a vital part of the database designer’s job.

A database system adds a new dimension to an organization’s management structure. The complexity of this managerial structure depends on the organization’s size, its functions, and its corporate culture. Therefore, database systems can be created and managed at diﬀerent levels of complexity and with varying adherence  to precise standards.