Within the larger information system, the database is subject to a life cycle as well. The Database Life Cycle (DBLC) contains six phases, as shown in Figure 9.3: database initial study, database design, implementation and loading, testing and evaluation, operation, and maintenance and evolution.

The overall purpose of the database initial study is to:

• Analyze the company situation
• Defne problems and constraints
• Defne objectives
• Defne scope and boundaries

Figure 9.4 depicts the interactive and iterative processes required to complete the frst phase of the DBLC successfully. Note that the database initial study phase leads to the development of database system objectives. Using Figure 9.4 as a discussion template, examine each of its components in greater detail.

Analyze the Company Situation -The company situation describes the general conditions in which a company operates, its organizational structure, and its mission. To analyze the company situation, the database designer must learn the company’s operational components, how they function, and how they interact.

The following issues must be resolved:
• What is the organization’s general operating environment, and what is its mission within that environment? The design must satisfy the operational demands created by the organization’s mission. For example, a mail -order business probably has operational requirements for its database that are quite diﬀerent from those of a manufacturing business.
• What is the organization’s structure? Knowing who controls what and who reports to whom is quite useful when you need to defne required information ﬂows, specific report and query formats, and so on

Defne Problems and Constraints -The designer has both formal and informal sources of information. If the company has existed for any length of time, it already has a system in place (either manual or computer-based). How does the existing system function? What input does the system require? What documents does the system generate? By whom and how is the system output used? Studying the paper trail can be very informative.

Define Objectives - A proposed database system must be designed to help solve at least the major problems identifed during the problem discovery process. As the list of problems unfolds, several common sources are likely to be discovered.

Note that the initial study phase also yields proposed problem solutions. Te designer’s job is to make sure that his or her database system objectives correspond to those envisioned by the end user(s). In any case, the database designer must begin to address the following questions:
• What is the proposed system’s initial objective?
• Will the system interface with other existing or future systems in the company?
• Will the system share the data with other systems or users?

Define Scope and Boundaries - The designer must recognize two sets of limits: scope and boundaries. The system’s scope defnes the extent of the design according to operational requirements. Will the database design encompass the entire organization, one or more departments within the organization, or one or more functions of a single department? The designer must know the “size of the ballpark.” Knowing the scope helps define the required data structures, the type and number of entities, the physical size of the database, and so on.

The proposed system is also subject to limits known as boundaries, which are external to the system. Has any designer ever been told, “We have all the time in the world” or “Use an unlimited budget and as many people as needed to make the design come together”? Boundaries are also imposed by existing hardware and software. Ideally, the designer can choose the hardware and software that will best accomplish the system goals.

It is important to understand that the business people and the db designer may have 2 different views of data. One is about the practical/operational aspects and one is the technical aspects.

For the purposes of the course however what is of interest to us for now is how to properly do a database initial study as it is crucial for the design process. As you can see, the process/workflow of the two development life cycle revolves mainly around: Planning, Identifying the requirements/needs, Designing, Implementing, Testing, and Making changes. The design process will be tackled more as we progress in the course for more information please consult the textbook on page 442.