Selecting a MySQL Database Using USE Statement

Summary: in this lesson, you will learn how to select a database in the mysql program by using the USE statement.

Selecting a MySQL database using the mysql client tool

When you log in to a MySQL database server using themysqlclient tool without specifying a database name, MySQL server will set the current database to NULL.

First, log in to MySQL using therootuser account:
mysql -u root -p
MySQL will prompt you for a password:
Enter password:
To log in, you need to provide the correct password of therootuser account and pressEnter. To display the current database, you use the following statement:SELECTdatabase();
It’ll return the following:
+------------+
| database() |
+------------+
| NULL       |
+------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
It means the current database is not set. If you issue a statement, MySQL will issue an error. For example:
SELECT * FROM t;
Error:
ERROR 1046 (3D000): No database selected
To select a database to work with, you use theUSEstatement:
USE database_name;
For example, the following statement uses the USE statement to set the current database to classicmodels:
USE classicmodels;
If you see the following message, it means that you have changed the database toclassicmodelssuccessfully:
Database changed
To verify it, you can use the select database() statement:
SELECTdatabase();
It’ll return something like:
+---------------+
| database()    |
+---------------+
| classicmodels |
+---------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
If the classicmodels database doesn’t exist, you’ll get the following error after executing theUSEstatement:
ERROR 1049 (42000): Unknown database 'classicmodels'
In this case, you need to find which databases are available on your server by using the show databases statement:
SHOW DATABASES;
The output may look like the following:
+--------------------+
| Database           |
+--------------------+
| information_schema |
| mysql              |
| performance_schema |
| sys                |
+--------------------+
4 rows in set (0.02 sec)
Selecting a database when you login

If you know which database you want to work with before you log in, you can use the-Dflag. For example, the following command connects to theclassicmodelsdatabase with the user accountroot:
mysql -u root -D classicmodels -p
In this command, we specify the databaseclassicmodelsafter the-Dflag.

After entering the password and logging in successfully, you can check the current database:
SELECTdatabase();
Output:
+---------------+
| database()    |
+---------------+
| classicmodels |
+---------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
Introduction to MySQL SELECT statement

TheSELECTstatement allows you to select data from one or more tables. To write aSELECTstatement in MySQL, you use this syntax:
SELECT select_list
FROM table_name;
In this syntax:

First, specify one or more columns from which you want to select data after theSELECTkeyword. If theselect_listhas multiple columns, you need to separate them by a comma (,).

Second, specify the name of the table from which you want to select data after theFROMkeyword.

The semicolon (;) is optional. It denotes the end of a statement. If you have two or more statements, you need to use the semicolon(;)to separate them so that MySQL will execute each statement individually.

TheSELECTandFROMare the keywords. By convention, you write the SQL keywords in uppercase. However, it’s not mandatory. Because SQL is case-insensitive, you can write the SQL statement in lowercase, uppercase, etc. For example:
select select_list
from table_name;
When executing the SELECTstatement, MySQL evaluates theFROM clause before theSELECT clause:

MySQL SELECT statement examples

We’ll use theemployees table in the[sample database](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-sample-database.aspx)for the following examples.

Theemployeestable has eight columns: employeeNumber, lastName, firstName, extension, email, officeCode, reportsTo, and jobTitle. The table also has many rows as shown in the following picture:

A) Using the MySQL SELECT statement to retrieve data from a single column example

The following example uses theSELECTstatement to select the last names of all employees:
SELECT lastName
FROM employees;
Here’s the partial output:
+-----------+
| lastName  |
+-----------+
| Murphy    |
| Patterson |
| Firrelli  |
| Patterson |
| Bondur    |
| Bow       |
| Jennings  |
...

The result of aSELECTstatement is called a result set as it’s a set of rows that results from the query.

B) Using the MySQL SELECT statement to query data from multiple columns example

The following example uses theSELECTstatement to get the first name, last name, and job title of employees:
SELECT
lastName,
firstName,
jobTitle
FROM
employees;
Even though the employeestable has many columns, theSELECTstatement returns data of three columnslastName,firstName, andjobTitlespecified in theSELECTclause:
+-----------+-----------+----------------------+
| lastname  | firstname | jobtitle             |
+-----------+-----------+----------------------+
| Murphy    | Diane     | President            |
| Patterson | Mary      | VP Sales             |
| Firrelli  | Jeff      | VP Marketing         |
| Patterson | William   | Sales Manager (APAC) |
| Bondur    | Gerard    | Sale Manager (EMEA)  |
...

C) Using the MySQL SELECT statement to retrieve data from all columns example

If you want to select data from all the columns of theemployeestable, you can specify all the column names in theSELECTclause like this:
SELECT employeeNumber,
lastName,
firstName,
extension,
email,
officeCode,
reportsTo,
jobTitle
FROM   employees;
Alternatively, you can use the asterisk (*) which is the shorthand for all columns. For example:
SELECT *
FROM employees;
The query returns data from all the columns of theemployeestable.

TheSELECT *is often called “select star” or “select all” since it selects data from all columns of the table. In practice, you should use theSELECT *for the ad-hoc queries only.

If you embed theSELECTstatement in the code such as[PHP](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/php-mysql/),[Java](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-jdbc-tutorial/),[Python](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/python-mysql/),[Node.js](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-nodejs/), you should explicitly specify the columns from which you want to select data.

Summary

Use theSELECTstatement to select data from a table.

Use theSELECT *to select data from all columns of a table.

MySQL Sample Database

We use the classicmodels database as a MySQL sample database to help you work with MySQL quickly and effectively. The classicmodels database is a retailer of scale models of classic cars database. It contains typical business data such as customers, products, sales orders, sales order line items, etc.

Download MySQL Sample Database

You can download the MySQL sample database via the following link:

[Download MySQL Sample Database](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/mysqlsampledatabase.zip)

The download file is in ZIP format so you need a zip program to unzip it. You can download a free zip program at[www.7-zip.org](http://www.7-zip.org/).

After uncompressing the sampledatabase.zipfile, you can load the sample database into MySQL database server by following [how to load sample database into MySQL database server tutorial](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/how-to-load-sample-database-into-mysql-database-server.aspx)and test it by using the following SQL statements:
USE classicmodels;
SELECT * FROM customers;
Basically, those statements switch the current database toclassicmodelsand query data from thecustomerstable. If you see the customer data returned, you have successfully imported the sample database into the MySQL database server.

MySQL Sample Database Schema

The MySQL sample database schema consists of the following tables:

Customers: stores customer’s data.

Products: stores a list of scale model cars.

ProductLines: stores a list of product line categories.

Orders: stores sales orders placed by customers.

OrderDetails: stores sales order line items for each sales order.

Payments: stores payments made by customers based on their accounts.

Employees: stores all employee information as well as the organization structure such as who reports to whom.

Offices: stores sales office data.

You can download the MySQL sample database ER-diagram in PDF format via the following link.

[Download MySQL Sample Database Diagram PDF A4](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/MySQL-Sample-Database-Diagram-PDF-A4.pdf)

How to Load the Sample Database into MySQL Server

Step 1

Download theclassicmodelsdatabase from the[MySQL sample database](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-sample-database.aspx)section.

Step 2

Unzip the downloaded file into a temporary folder. You can use any folder you want. To make it simple, we will unzip the file to theC:\temp folder.

If you use another operating system such as macOS, Linux, or Unix, please feel free to unzip it to any directory you like.

Step 3

Connect to the MySQL server using themysqlclient program. Themysqlprogram is located in thebindirectory of the MySQL installation folder.
> mysql -u root -p
Enter password: ********
You will need to enter the password for therootuser account to log in.

Step 4

Use thesourcecommand to load data into the MySQL Server:
mysql> source c:\temp\mysqlsampledatabase.sql
Step 5

Use theSHOW DATABASEScommand to list all databases in the current server:
mysql> showdatabases;
The output will look like the following that includes the newly createdclassicmodelsdatabase:
+--------------------+
| Database           |
+--------------------+
| classicmodels      |
| information_schema |
| mysql              |
| performance_schema |
| sys                |
+--------------------+