Introduction to the MySQL INSERT statement

TheINSERTstatement allows you to insert one or more rows into a table. The following illustrates the syntax of theINSERTstatement:
INSERT INTO table(c1,c2,...)
VALUES (v1,v2,...);
In this syntax,

First, specify the table name and a list of comma-separated columns inside parentheses after theINSERT INTOclause.

Then, put a comma-separated list of values of the corresponding columns inside the parentheses following theVALUESkeyword.

The number of columns and values must be the same. In addition, the positions of columns must be corresponding with the positions of their values.

Toinsert multiple rowsinto a table using a singleINSERTstatement, you use the following syntax:
INSERTINTOtable(c1,c2,...)
VALUES
(v11,v12,...),
(v21,v22,...),
...
(vnn,vn2,...);
In this syntax, rows are separated by commas in theVALUESclause.

MySQL INSERT examples

Let’screate a new tablenamedtasksfor practicing theINSERTstatement.
CREATETABLEIFNOTEXISTS tasks (
task_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT,
title VARCHAR(255) NOTNULL,
start_date DATE,
due_date DATE,
priorityTINYINTNOTNULLDEFAULT3,
description TEXT,
PRIMARY KEY (task_id)
);
1) MySQL INSERT – simple INSERT example

The following statement inserts a new row into thetaskstable:
INSERTINTO tasks(title,priority)
VALUES('Learn MySQL INSERT Statement',1);
MySQL returns the following message:
1 row(s) affected
It means that one row has been inserted into thetaskstable successfully.

This query returns data from thetaskstable:
SELECT * FROM tasks;
Here is the output:

In this example, we specified the values for onlytitleandprioritycolumns. For other columns, MySQL uses the default values.

Thetask_idcolumn is an[AUTO_INCREMENT](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-sequence/) column. It means that MySQL generates a sequential integer whenever a row is inserted into the table.

Thestart_date,due_date, anddescriptioncolumns useNULLas the default value, therefore, MySQL uses[NULL](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-null/)to insert into these columns if you don’t specify their values in theINSERTstatement.

2) MySQL INSERT – Inserting rows using default value example

If you want to insert a default value into a column, you have two ways:

Ignore both the column name and value in theINSERTstatement.

Specify the column name in theINSERT INTOclause and use theDEFAULTkeyword in theVALUESclause.

The following example demonstrates the second way:
INSERTINTO tasks(title,priority)
VALUES('Understanding DEFAULT keyword in INSERT statement',DEFAULT);
In this example, we specified theprioritycolumn and the  DEFAULTkeyword.

Because the default value for the columnpriorityis 3 as declared in the table definition:
priority TINYINT NOT NULL DEFAULT 3
MySQL uses the number 3 to insert into theprioritycolumn.

The following statement returns the contents of thetaskstable after the insert:
SELECT * FROM tasks;
3) MySQL INSERT – Inserting dates into the table example

To insert a literal date value into a column, you use the following format:
'YYYY-MM-DD'
In this format:

YYYYrepresents a four-digit year e.g., 2018.

MMrepresents a two-digit month e.g., 01, 02, and 12.

DDrepresents a two-digit day e.g., 01, 02, 30.

The following statement inserts a new row to thetaskstable with the start and due date values:
INSERTINTO tasks(title, start_date, due_date)
VALUES('Insert date into table','2018-01-09','2018-09-15');
The following picture shows the contents of thetaskstable after the insert:

It is possible to use expressions in theVALUESclause. For example, the following statement adds a new task using the current date for start date and due date columns:
INSERTINTO tasks(title,start_date,due_date)
VALUES('Use current date for the task',CURRENT_DATE(),CURRENT_DATE())
In this example, we used theCURRENT_DATE()function as the values for thestart_dateanddue_datecolumns. Note that theCURRENT_DATE()function is adate functionthat returns the current system date.

Here are the contents of thetaskstable after insert:

4) MySQL INSERT – Inserting multiple rows example

The following statement inserts three rows into thetaskstable:
INSERTINTO tasks(title, priority)
VALUES
('My first task', 1),
('It is the second task',2),
('This is the third task of the week',3);
In this example, each row data is specified as a list of values in theVALUESclause.

MySQL returns the following message:
3 row(s) affected Records: 3  Duplicates: 0  Warnings: 0
It means that the three rows have been inserted successfully with no duplicates or warnings.
SELECT * FROM tasks;
The tabletaskshas the following data:

MySQL INSERT multiple rows statement

To insert multiple rows into a table, you use the following form of theINSERTstatement:
INSERTINTO table_name (column_list)
VALUES
(value_list_1),
(value_list_2),
...
(value_list_n);

In this syntax:

First, specify the name of table that you want to insert after theINSERT INTOkeywords.

Second, specify a comma-separated column list inside parentheses after the table name.

Third, specify a comma-separated list of row data in theVALUESclause. Each element of the list represents a row. The number of values in each element must be the same as the number of columns in thecolumn_list.

MySQL INSERT multiple rows limit

In theory, you can insert any number of rows using a singleINSERTstatement. However, when MySQL server receives theINSERTstatement whose size is bigger thanmax_allowed_packet, it will issue a packet too large error and terminates the connection.

This statement shows the current value of themax_allowed_packetvariable:
SHOWVARIABLESLIKE'max_allowed_packet';

Here is the output on our MySQL database server. Note that the value in your server may be different.

The number is theValuecolumn is the number of bytes.

To set a new value for themax_allowed_packetvariable, you use the following statement:
SETGLOBAL max_allowed_packet=size;

wheresizeis an integer that represents the number the maximum allowed packet size in bytes.

Note that themax_allowed_packethas no influence on theINSERT INTO .. SELECTstatement. TheINSERT INTO .. SELECTstatement can insert as many rows as you want.

MySQL INSERT multiple rows example

Let’s take an example of using theINSERTmultiple rows statement.

First,create a new tablecalledprojectsfor the demonstration:
CREATETABLE projects(
project_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT,
nameVARCHAR(100) NOTNULL,
start_date DATE,
end_date DATE,
PRIMARY KEY(project_id)
);

Second, use theINSERTmultiple rows statement to insert two rows into theprojectstable:
INSERTINTO
projects(name, start_date, end_date)
VALUES
('AI for Marketing','2019-08-01','2019-12-31'),
('ML for Sales','2019-05-15','2019-11-20');

MySQL issued the following message:
2 row(s) affected

It means that two rows have been inserted into theprojectstable successfully.

Note that when you insert multiple rows and use theLAST_INSERT_ID()function to get the last inserted id of anAUTO_INCREMENTcolumn, you will get the id of the first inserted row only, not the id of the last inserted row.

Third, use the followingSELECTstatement to verify the inserts:
SELECT * FROM projects;

This picture shows the output:

Introduction to MySQL UPDATE statement

TheUPDATEstatement updates data in a table. It allows you to change the values in one or more columns of a single row or multiple rows.

The following illustrates the basic syntax of theUPDATEstatement:
UPDATE [LOW_PRIORITY] [IGNORE] table_name
SET
column_name1 = expr1,
column_name2 = expr2,
...
[WHERE
condition];
In this syntax:

First, specify the name of the table that you want to update data after theUPDATEkeyword.

Second, specify which column you want to update and the new value in theSETclause. To update values in multiple columns, you use a list of comma-separated assignments by supplying a value in each column’s assignment in the form of a literal value, an expression, or asubquery.

Third, specify which rows to be updated using a condition in theWHERE clause. TheWHEREclause is optional. If you omit it, theUPDATEstatement will modify all rows in the table.

Notice that the WHEREclause is so important that you should not forget. Sometimes, you may want to update just one row; However, you may forget theWHEREclause and accidentally update all rows of the table.

MySQL supports two modifiers in theUPDATEstatement.

TheLOW_PRIORITYmodifier instructs theUPDATEstatement to delay the update until there is no connection reading data from the table. TheLOW_PRIORITYtakes effect for the[storage engines](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/understand-mysql-table-types-innodb-myisam.aspx)that use table-level[locking](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-table-locking/)only such asMyISAM,MERGE, andMEMORY.

TheIGNOREmodifier enables theUPDATEstatement to continue updating rows even if errors occurred. The rows that cause errors such as duplicate-key conflicts are not updated.

MySQL UPDATE examples

Let’s practice theUPDATEstatement.

1) Using MySQL UPDATE to modify values in a single column example

See the followingemployeestable from thesample database.

In this example, we will update the email ofMary Pattersonto the new emailmary.patterso@classicmodelcars.com.

First, find Mary’s email from theemployeestable using the followingSELECTstatement:
SELECT
firstname,
lastname,
email
FROM
employees
WHERE
employeeNumber = 1056;
Second, update the email address ofMaryto the new emailmary.patterson@classicmodelcars.com:
UPDATE employees
SET
email = 'mary.patterson@classicmodelcars.com'WHERE
employeeNumber = 1056;
MySQL issued the number of rows affected:
1 row(s) affected
In thisUPDATEstatement:

The[WHERE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-where/)clause specifies the row with employee number1056will be updated.

TheSETclause sets the value of theemailcolumn to the new email.

Third,  execute theSELECTstatement again to verify the change:
SELECT
firstname,
lastname,
email
FROM
employees
WHERE
employeeNumber = 1056;
2) Using MySQL UPDATE to modify values in multiple columns

To update values in the multiple columns, you need to specify the assignments in theSETclause. For example, the following statement updates both last name and email columns of employee number 1056:
UPDATE employees
SET
lastname = 'Hill',
email = 'mary.hill@classicmodelcars.com'WHERE
employeeNumber = 1056;
Let’s verify the changes:
SELECT
firstname,
lastname,
email
FROM
employees
WHERE
employeeNumber = 1056;
3) Using MySQL UPDATE to replace string example

The following example updates the domain parts of emails of allSales Repswith office code6:
UPDATE employees
SET email = REPLACE(email,'@classicmodelcars.com','@mysqltutorial.org')
WHERE
jobTitle = 'Sales Rep'AND
officeCode = 6;
In this example, the[REPLACE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-string-replace-function.aspx)()function replaces@classicmodelcars.com in the email column with@mysqltutorial.org.

4) Using MySQL UPDATE to update rows returned by a SELECT statement example

You can supply the values for theSETclause from aSELECTstatement that queries data from other tables.

For example, in thecustomerstable, some customers do not have any sale representative. The value of the columnsaleRepEmployeeNumberisNULLas follows:
SELECT
customername,
salesRepEmployeeNumber
FROM
customers
WHERE
salesRepEmployeeNumber ISNULL;
We can take a sale representative and update for those customers.

To do this, we can select a random employee whose job title isSales Repfrom the  employeestable and update it for the  employeestable.

This queryselects a randomemployee from the tableemployeeswhose job title is theSales Rep.
SELECT
employeeNumber
FROM
employees
WHERE
jobtitle = 'Sales Rep'ORDERBYRAND()
LIMIT1;
To update the sales representative employee number  column in thecustomerstable, we place the query above in theSETclause of theUPDATEstatement as follows:
UPDATE customers
SET
salesRepEmployeeNumber = (SELECT
employeeNumber
FROM
employees
WHERE
jobtitle = 'Sales Rep'ORDERBYRAND()
LIMIT1)
WHERE
salesRepEmployeeNumber ISNULL;
If you query data from the  employeestable, you will see that every customer has a sales representative. In other words, the following query returns no row.
SELECT
salesRepEmployeeNumber
FROM
customers
WHERE
salesRepEmployeeNumber ISNULL;

MySQL Select

Typically, you use aSELECTstatement to select data from a table in the database:
SELECT select_list
FROM table_name;
MySQL doesn’t require theFROMclause. It means that you can have aSELECTstatement without theFROMclause like this:
SELECT select_list;
Here’s a trivial example:
SELECT1 + 1;
Output:
+-------+
| 1 + 1 |
+-------+
|     2 |
+-------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
MySQL has many built-in functions like string, date, and Math functions. And you can use theSELECTstatement to execute these functions.

The following example returns the current date and time of the MySQL server:
SELECTNOW();
Output:
+---------------------+
| NOW()               |
+---------------------+
| 2021-07-26 08:08:02 |
+---------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
TheNOW()function returns the current date & time of the server on which MySQL runs. TheNOW()function doesn’t have any parameters. To call it, you place the parentheses () after the function name.

If a function has parameters, you need to pass arguments into it. For example, concatenate strings into one string, you can use theCONCAT()function:
SELECTCONCAT('John',' ','Doe');
Output:
+--------------------------+
| CONCAT('John',' ','Doe') |
+--------------------------+
| John Doe                 |
+--------------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
The CONCAT() function accepts one or more strings and concatenates them into a single string.

The dual table

Sometimes, you still need to use theFROMclause but you don’t want to reference any actual table. In this case, you can use the dual table in theFROMclause:
SELECT select_list
FROM dual;
The dual table is a dummy table, not an actual table.

The dual is also necessary in case you need other clauses of theSELECTstatement. Without theFROMclause, theSELECTstatement would not be valid.

A quick introduction to the column alias

By default, MySQL uses the expression specified in theSELECTclause as the column name of the result set. To change a column name of the result set, you can use a column alias:
SELECT expression AS column_alias;
To assign an alias to a column, you place the AS keyword after the expression followed by a column alias. TheASkeyword is optional, so you can skip it like this:
SELECT expression column_alias;
For example:
SELECTCONCAT('John',' ','Doe') ASname;
Output:
+----------+
| name     |
+----------+
| John Doe |
+----------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
If the column alias contains spaces, you need to place it inside quotes like this:
SELECTCONCAT('Jane',' ','Doe') AS'Full name';
Output:
+-----------+
| Full name |
+-----------+
| John Doe  |
+-----------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)