Introduction
It is important to be able to measure, or at least make educated statements about, the space and time complexity of an algorithm. This will allow you to compare the merits of two alternative approaches to a problem you need to solve, and also to determine whether a proposed solution will meet required resource constraints before you invest money and time coding.

Analysisis donebeforecoding.Profiling(a.k.a.benchmarking) is doneafterthe code is written.

Measuring Time
Theabsoluterunning time of an algorithm cannot bepredicted, since this depends on the programming language used to implement the algorithm, the computer the program runs on, other programs running at the same time, the quality of the operating system, and many other factors. We need amachine-independentnotion of an algorithm’s running time.

The current state-of-the-art in analysis is finding a measure of an algorithm’srelativerunning time, as a function ofhow many items there are in the input, i.e., the number of symbols required to reasonably encode the input, which we calln. Thencould be:

The number of items in a container

The length of a string or file

The degree of a polynomial

The number of digits (or bits) in an integer

The first three only make sense when each of the elements (items, characters, coefficients/exponents) have a bounded-size. For example: if all items are 64-bit integers, then the number of items can be used forn, but if numeric values are unbounded, you have to count bits!

We count the number ofabstract operationsas a function ofn.
Example: Printing Each Element in an Arrayfor (var i = 0; i < a.length; i++) {
System.out.println(a[i]);
}
Heren=a.length(provided we know that all of the items in the array have a fixed size, which is often the case). We have

1initialization ofi

ncomparisons ofiagainst a.length

nincrements ofi

narray indexing operations (to computea[i])

ninvocations ofSystem.out.println

so we writeT(n)=4n+1

Or should we?

All operations are not created equal. The printing completely overwhelms the increments, compares and indexing operations. We might as well talk about havingncompare-index-print-increment operations. ThenT(n)=n+1. While we’re at it, we might as well realize that initialization doesn’t mean much, so we’re safe to writeT(n)=n.

Source: https://cs.lmu.edu/~ray/notes/alganalysis/