Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) has 4 core Principles: Inheritance, Polymorphism, Encapsulation, and Abstraction. The main goal of Object-Oriented Programming is code reusability and modularity meaning it can be reused for different purposes and integrated in other different programs. These 4 core principles help guide programmers to fully implement Object-Oriented Programming. In this laboratory activity, we will be exploring Inheritance while incorporating other principles such as Encapsulation and Abstraction which are used to prevent access to certain attributes and methods inside a class and abstract or hide complex codes which do not need to be accessed by the user.

An example is given below considering a simple UML Class Diagram:

The Base Character class will contain the following attributes and methods and a Novice Class will become a child of Character. The OOP Principle of Inheritance will make Novice have all the attributes and methods of the Character class as well as other unique attributes and methods it may have. This is referred to as Single-level Inheritance. In this activity, the Novice class will be made the parent of three other different classes Swordsman, Archer, and Magician. The three classes will now possess the attributes and methods of the Novice class which has the attributes and methods of the Base Character Class. This is referred to as Multi-level inheritance.

The last type of inheritance that will be explored is the Boss class which will inherit from the three classes under Novice. This Boss class will be able to use any abilities of the three Classes. This is referred to as Multiple inheritance.