Recap of General SELECT Syntax
The SELECT query specifies the columns to be retrieved as a column list. The syntax for a basic SELECT query that retrieves data from a table is:

SELECT columnlist FROM tablelist;

SELECT columnlist
FROM tablelist;

The columnlist represents one or more attributes, separated by commas. If the programmer wants all of the columns to be returned, then the asterisk (*) wildcard can be used. A wildcard character is a symbol that can be used as a general substitute for other characters or commands. This wildcard means “all columns.”.

SELECT * FROM PRODUCT;

SELECT *
FROM PRODUCT;

This is an example of a SELECT statement with *

This is an example of a SELECT statement with columnlist.

Ex.

SELECT P_CODE, P_DESCRIPT, P_PRICE, P_QOH
FROM PRODUCT;

Using aliases
Recall that the attribute within an entity is implemented as a column in the table. The attribute name becomes the name of that column. If the programmer wants a different name to be used as the label in the output, a new name can be specified. The new name is referred to as an alias.

SELECT P_CODE, P_DESCRIPT AS DESCRIPTION, P_PRICE AS “Unit Price”, P_QOH QTY
FROM PRODUCT;

There are a few things of interest about the use of these aliases:

Not all columns in a query must use an alias

AS is optional, but recommended

Aliases that contain a space must be inside a delimiter (quotes)

The image below shows an example of using aliases:

Using Computed Columns
A computed column (also called a calculated column) represents a derived attribute. A derived attribute may or may not be stored in the database. If the decision is made not to store the derived attribute, then the attribute must be calculated when it is needed. For example, suppose that you want to determine the total value of each of the products
currently held in inventory. Logically, that determination requires the multiplication of each product’s quantity on hand by its current price. You can accomplish this task with
the following command:

SELECT P_DESCRIPT, P_QOH, P_PRICE, P_QOH * P_PRICE
FROM PRODUCT;

The image below shows an example of using Computed Columns

Some important notes about Alias and Computed Columns is that:

They can be used together (combined) in one SELECT statement.

A Computed Column can be composed of Arithmetic Operations just like in a programming language.

Do not confuse the multiplication symbol ( * ) with the wildcard symbol used by some SQL implementations. The Wildcard * is used in Column selection and Filtering (WHERE).
Using the WHERE Clause
When coupled with appropriate search conditions, SELECT is an incredibly powerful tool that enables you to transform data into information. Sometimes you need to fine-tune the SELECT command by adding restrictions to the search criteria.

For example, you can create queries that can answer questions such as these: “What products were supplied by a particular vendor?,” “Which products are priced below $10?,” and “How many products supplied by a given vendor were sold between January 5, 2018, and March 20, 2018?”
Selecting Rows with Conditional Restrictions
You can select partial table contents by placing restrictions on the rows to be included in the output. Use the WHERE clause to add conditional restrictions to the SELECT statement that limit the rows returned by the query. The following syntax enables you to specify which rows to select:

SELECT columnlist
FROM tablelist
[WHERE conditionlist]

The bracket means that it is an optional clause that you can add. There are a lot of Clauses to add to the SELECT statement that makes it more powerful in retrieving data.

The SELECT statement retrieves all rows that match the specified condition(s)
also known as the conditional criteria you specified in the WHERE clause. The
conditionlist in the WHERE clause of the SELECT statement is represented by one or more conditional expressions, separated by logical operators. The WHERE clause is optional.

For example, consider the following query:

SELECT P_DESCRIPT, P_QOH, P_PRICE, V_CODE
FROM PRODUCT
WHERE V_CODE = 21344;

Numerous conditional restrictions can be placed on the selected table contents. For example, the comparison operators shown in Table 7.6 can be used to restrict output. Note that there are two options for not equal to. Both <> and != are well supported and perform the same function.

The following example uses one of the not equal to operators:

SELECT P_DESCRIPT, P_QOH, P_PRICE, V_CODE
FROM PRODUCT
WHERE V_CODE <> 21344;

The output, shown in Figure 7.23, lists all of the rows for which the vendor code is not 21344.

ORDER BY Clause Option
The ORDER BY clause is especially useful when the listing order is important to you. The syntax is:

SELECT columnlist
FROM tablelist
[ORDER BY columnlist [ASC | DESC] ];

Although you have the option of declaring the order type—ascending or ­descending the default order is ascending. For example, if you want the contents of the PRODUCT table to be listed by P_PRICE in ascending order, use the following command:

SELECT P_CODE, P_DESCRIPT, P_QOH, P_PRICE
FROM PRODUCT
ORDER BY P_PRICE;

The output is shown in Figure 7.18.

The output is shown in Figure 7.18. Note that ORDER BY yields an ascending price listing. Comparing the listing in Figure 7.18 to the actual table contents shown earlier in
Figure 7.2, you will see that the lowest-priced product is listed first in Figure 7.18, followed by the next lowest-priced product, and so on. However, although ORDER BY
produces a sorted output, the actual table contents are unaffected by the ORDER BY operation.

You can add DESC after the attribute to indicate descending order. To produce the listing with products sorted in descending order by price, you would enter:

SELECT P_CODE, P_DESCRIPT, P_QOH, P_PRICE
FROM PRODUCT
ORDER BY P_PRICE DESC;

You can learn more about more about the configurations we can do with the SELECT statement in the activity 4 and in our reference material, starting at page 244 which is Chapter 7: Introduction to SQL.