The first major change in the electronic computer came with the replacement of the vacuum tube by the transistor. The transistor, which is smaller, cheaper, and generates less heat than a vacuum tube, can be used in the same way as a vacuum tube to construct computers. Unlike the vacuum tube, which requires wires, metal plates, a glass capsule, and a vacuum, the transistor is a solid- state device, made from silicon.

The transistor was invented at Bell Labs in 1947 and by the 1950s had launched an electronic revolution. It was not until the late 1950s, however, that fully transistorized computers were commercially available, like the TRADIC, below. The use of the transistor defines the second generation of computers. It has become widely accepted to classify computers into generations based on the fundamental hardware technology employed . Each new generation is characterized by greater processing performance, larger memory capacity, and smaller size than the previous one. But there are other changes as well.

The second generation saw the introduction of more complex arithmetic and logic units and control units, the use of high- level programming languages, and the provision of system software with the computer. In broad terms, system software provided the ability to load programs, move data to peripherals, and libraries to perform common computations, similar to what modern operating systems, such as Windows and Linux, do. It will be useful to examine an important member of the second generation: the IBM 7094.

From the introduction of the 700 series in 1952 to the introduction of the last member of the 7000 series in 1964, this IBM product line underwent an evolution that is typical of computer products. Successive members of the product line showed increased performance, increased capacity, and/or lower cost. The size of main memory, in multiples of 210 36-bit words, grew from 2k (1k = 210) to 32k words,7 while the time to access one word of memory, the memory cycle time, fell from 30 ms to 1.4 ms. The number of opcodes grew from a modest 24 to 185. Also, over the lifetime of this series of computers, the relative speed of the CPU increased by a factor of 50. Speed improvements are achieved by improved electronics (e.g., a transistor implementation is faster than a vacuum tube implementation) and more complex circuitry. For example, the IBM 7094 includes an Instruction Backup Register, used to buffer the next instruction. The control unit fetches two adjacent words from memory for an instruction fetch. Except for the occurrence of a branching instruction, which is relatively infrequent (perhaps 10 to 15%), this means that the control unit has to access memory for an instruction on only half the instruction cycles.

This prefetching significantly reduces the average instruction cycle time. Figure above shows a large (many peripherals) configuration for an IBM 7094, which is representative of second- generation computers. Several differences from the IAS computer are worth noting. The most important of these is the use of data channels. A data channel is an independent I/O module with its own processor and instruction set. In a computer system with such devices, the CPU does not execute detailed I/O instructions. Such instructions are stored in a main memory to be executed by a special- purpose processor in the data channel itself. The CPU initiates an I/O transfer by sending a control signal to the data channel, instructing it to execute a sequence of instructions in memory. The data channel performs its task independently of the CPU and signals the CPU when the operation is complete. This arrangement relieves the CPU of a considerable processing burden.

Another new feature is the multiplexer, which is the central termination point for data channels, the CPU, and memory. The multiplexer schedules access to the memory from the CPU and data channels, allowing these devices to act independently.