Relational algebra defines the theoretical way of manipulating table contents using relational operators.

Formal Definitions and Terminology

One advantage of using formal mathematical representations of operations is that mathematical statements are unambiguous. These statements are very specific, and they require that database designers be specific in the language used to explain them. As previously explained, it is common to use the terms relation and table interchangeably. However, since the mathematical terms need to be precise, we will use the more specific term relation when discussing the formal definitions of the various relational algebra operators.

One important aspect of using the specific term relation is that it acknowledges the distinction between the relation and the relation variable, or relvar, for short. A relation is the data that we see in our tables. A relvar is a variable that holds a relation. For example, imagine you were writing a program and created a variable named qty for holding integer data. The variable qty is not an integer itself; it is a container for holding integers. Similarly, when you create a table, the table structure holds the table data. The structure is properly called a relvar, and the data in the structure would be a relation. The relvar is a container (variable) for holding relation data, not the relation itself. The data in the table is a relation.

A relvar has two parts: the heading and the body. The relvar heading contains the names of the attributes, while the relvar body contains the relation. To conveniently maintain this distinction in formulas, an unspecified relation is often assigned a lowercase letter (e.g., “r”), while the relvar is assigned an uppercase letter (e.g., “R”). We could then say that r is a relation of type R, or r(R).

Relational Set Operators

The relational operators have the property of closure; that is, the use of relational algebra

operators on existing relations (tables) produces new relations. This section will focus on the SELECT (or RESTRICT), PROJECT, UNION, INTERSECT, DIFFERENCE, PRODUCT, JOIN, and DIVIDE operators.

Select (Restrict) SELECT, also known as RESTRICT, is referred to as a unary operator because it only uses one table as input. It yields values for all rows found in the table that satisfy a given condition. SELECT can be used to list all of the rows, or it can yield only rows that match a specified criterion. In other words, SELECT yields a horizontal subset of a table. SELECT will not limit the attributes returned so all attributes of the table will be included in the result.

Project PROJECT yields all values for selected attributes. It is also a unary operator, accepting only one table as input. PROJECT will return only the attributes requested, in the order in which they are requested. In other words, PROJECT yields a vertical subset of a table. PROJECT will not limit the rows returned, so all rows of the specified attributes will be included in the result.

Union UNION combines all rows from two tables, excluding duplicate rows. To be used in the UNION, the tables must have the same attribute characteristics; in other words, the columns and domains must be compatible. When two or more tables share the same number of columns, and when their corresponding columns share the same or compatible domains, they are said to be union-compatible.

Intersect INTERSECT yields only the rows that appear in both tables. As with UNION, the tables must be union-compatible to yield valid results. For example, you cannot use INTERSECT if one of the attributes is numeric and one is character-based. For the rows to be considered the same in both tables and appear in the result of the INTERSECT, the entire rows must be exact duplicates.

Difference DIFFERENCE yields all rows in one table that are not found in the other table; that is, it subtracts one table from the other. As with UNION, the tables must be union-compatible to yield valid results.

Product PRODUCT yields all possible pairs of rows from two tables—also known as the Cartesian product. Therefore, if one table has 6 rows and the other table has 3 rows, the PRODUCT yields a list composed of 6 × 3 = 18 rows.

Join JOIN allows information to be intelligently combined from two or more tables. JOIN is the real power behind the relational database, allowing the use of independent tables linked by common attributes.

The table that will be used for JOIN.

A natural join links tables by selecting only the rows with common values in their common attribute(s). A natural join is the result of a three-stage process:

1. First, a PRODUCT of the tables is created, yielding the results shown below.

2. Second, a SELECT is performed on the output of Step 1 to yield only the rows for which the AGENT_CODE values are equal. The common columns are referred to as the join columns.

3. A PROJECT is performed on the results of Step 2 yield a single copy of each attribute, thereby eliminating duplicate columns.

A left join yields all of the rows in the CUSTOMER table, including those that do not have a matching value in the AGENT table.

A right join yields all of the rows in the AGENT table, including those that do not have matching values in the CUSTOMER table.

Outer joins are especially useful when you are trying to determine what values in related tables cause referential integrity problems. Such problems are created when foreign key values do not match the primary key values in the related table(s).

Divide The DIVIDE operator is used to answer questions about one set of data being associated with all values of data in another set of data. The DIVIDE operation uses one double-column table (Table 1) as the dividend and one single-column table (Table 2) as the divisor.

Table 1 is “divided” by Table 2 to produce Table 3. Tables 1 and 2 both contain the P_CODE column but do not share the CUS_CODE column.

To be included in the resulting Table 3, a value in the unshared column (CUS_CODE) must be associated with every value in Table 2.

The only customers associated with all of products 123456, 234567, and 567890 are customers 10030 and 12550.