In the relational model, keys are important because they are used to ensure that each row in a table is uniquely identifiable. They are also used to establish relationships among tables and to ensure the integrity of the data.

A key consists of one or more attributes that determine other attributes. For example, an invoice number identifies all of the invoice attributes, such as the invoice date and the customer name.
Dependencies
The role of a key is based on the concept of determination. Determination is the state in which knowing the value of one attribute makes it possible to determine the value of another

The idea of determination is not unique to the database environment. You are familiar with the formula revenue - cost = profit. This is a form of determination, because if you are given the revenue and the cost, you can determine the profit. Given profit and revenue, you can determine the cost. Given any two values, you can determine the third. Determination in a database environment, however, is not normally based on a formula but on the relationships among the attributes.

If you consider what the attributes of the STUDENT table in Figure 3.1 actually represent, you will see a relationship among the attributes. If you are given a value for STU_NUM, then you can determine the value for STU_LNAME because one and only one value of STU_LNAME is associated with any given value of STU_NUM.

A specific terminology and notation is used to describe relationships based on determination. The relationship is called functional dependence, which means that the value of one or more attributes determines the value of one or more other attributes.

The standard notation for representing the relationship between STU_NUM and STU_LNAME is
as follows: STU_NUM → STU_LNAME.

In this functional dependency, the attribute whose value determines another is called the determinant or the key. The attribute whose value is determined by the other attribute is called the dependent. Using this terminology, it would be correct to say that STU_NUM is the determinant and STU_LNAME is the dependent. STU_NUM functionally determines STU_LNAME, and STU_LNAME is functionally dependent on STU_NUM.

As stated earlier, functional dependence can involve a determinant that comprises more than one attribute and multiple dependent attributes. Refer to the STUDENT table for the following example:

STU_NUM → (STU_LNAME, STU_FNAME, STU_GPA)

and
(STU_FNAME, STU_LNAME, STU_INIT, STU_PHONE) → (STU_DOB, STU_HRS,
STU_GPA)

Determinants made of more than one attribute require special consideration. It is possible to have a functional dependency in which the determinant contains attributes that are not necessary for the relationship. Consider the following two functional dependencies:
STU_NUM → STU_GPA
(STU_NUM, STU_LNAME) → STU_GPA

In the second functional dependency, the determinant includes STU_LNAME, but this attribute is not necessary for the relationship. Te functional dependency is valid because given a pair of values for STU_NUM and STU_LNAME, only one value would occur for STU_GPA. A more specific term, full functional dependence, is used to refer to functional dependencies in which the entire collection of attributes in the determinant is necessary for the relationship. Therefore, the dependency shown in the preceding example is a functional dependency, but not a full functional dependency.

Types of Keys
Recall that a key is an attribute or group of attributes that can determine the values of other attributes. Therefore, keys are determinants in functional dependencies. Several different types of keys are used in the relational model, and you need to be familiar with them.

A composite key is a key that is composed of more than one attribute. An attribute that is a part of a key is called a key attribute. For example,
STU_NUM → STU_GPA
(STU_LNAME, STU_FNAME, STU_INIT, STU_PHONE) → STU_HRS

In the first functional dependency, STU_NUM is an example of a key composed of only one key attribute. In the second functional dependency, (STU_LNAME, STU_FNAME, STU_INIT, STU_PHONE) is a composite key composed of four key attributes.

A superkey is a key that can uniquely identify any row in the table. In other words, a superkey functionally determines every attribute in the row. In the STUDENT table, STU_NUM is a superkey, as are the composite keys (STU_NUM, STU_LNAME), (STU_NUM, STU_LNAME, STU_INIT), and (STU_LNAME, STU_FNAME, STU_INIT, STU_PHONE). In fact, because STU_NUM alone is a superkey, any composite key that has STU_NUM as a key attribute will also be a superkey.

Be careful, however, because not all keys are superkeys. For example, Gigantic State University determines its student classification based on hours completed, as shown in Table 3.2.

Therefore, you can write STU_HRS → STU_CLASS. However, the specific number of hours is not dependent on  the classification. It is quite possible to find a junior with 62 completed hours or one with 84 completed hours. In other words, the classification (STU_CLASS) does not determine one and only one value for completed hours (STU_HRS).

One specific type of superkey is called a candidate key. A candidate key is a minimal superkey—that is, a superkey without any unnecessary attributes. A candidate key is based on a full functional dependency. For example, STU_NUM would be a candidate key, as would (STU_LNAME, STU_FNAME, STU_INIT, STU_PHONE). On the other hand, (STU_NUM, STU_LNAME) is a superkey, but it is not a candidate key because STU_LNAME could be removed and the key would still be a superkey.

A table can have many different candidate keys. If the STUDENT table also included the students’ Social Security numbers as STU_SSN, then it would appear to be a candidate key.

Candidate keys are called candidates because they are the eligible options from which the designer will choose when selecting the primary key. The primary key(PK)is the candidate key chosen to be the primary means by which the rows of the table are uniquely identified.

Entity Integrity

Entity integrity is the condition in which each row (entity instance) in the table has its own unique identity. To ensure entity integrity, the primary key has two requirements:
(1) all of the values in the primary key must be unique, and
(2) no key attribute in the primary key can contain a null.

Null values are problematic in the relational model. A null is the absence of any data value, and it is never allowed in any part of the primary key. From a theoretical perspective, it can be argued that a table that contains a null is not properly a relational table at all. From a practical perspective, however, some nulls cannot be reasonably avoided. For example, not all students have a middle initial. As a general rule, nulls should be avoided as much as reasonably possible. In fact, an abundance of nulls is often a sign of a poor design.

Also, nulls should be avoided in the database because their meaning is not always identifiable. For example, a null could represent any of the following:

• An unknown attribute value
• A known, but missing, attribute value
• A “not applicable” condition

Depending on the sophistication of the application development software, nulls can create problems when functions such as COUNT, AVERAGE, and SUM are used. In addition, nulls can create logical problems when relational tables are linked.

In addition to its role in providing a unique identity to each row in the table, the primary key may play an additional role in the controlled redundancy that allows the relational model to work. Recall from Chapter 2 that a hallmark of the relational model is that relationships between tables are implemented through common attributes as a form of controlled redundancy. For example, Figure 3.2 shows PRODUCT and VENDOR tables that are linked through a common attribute, VEND_CODE. VEND_CODE is referred to as a foreign key in the PRODUCT table. A foreign key (FK) is the primary key of one table that has been placed into another table to create a common attribute.

Figure 3.2, the primary key of VENDOR, VEND_CODE, was placed in the PRODUCT table; therefore, VEND_CODE is a foreign key in PRODUCT. One advantage of using a proper naming convention for table attributes is that you can identify foreign keys more easily. For example, because the STUDENT table in Figure 3.1 used a proper naming convention, you can identify two foreign keys in the table (DEPT_CODE and PROF_NUM) that imply the existence of two other tables in the database (DEPARTMENT and PROFESSOR) related to STUDENT.

Just as the primary key has a role in ensuring the integrity of the database, so does the foreign key. Foreign keys are used to ensure referential integrity, the condition in which every reference to an entity instance by another entity instance is valid. In other words, every foreign key entry must either be null or a valid value in the primary key of the related table. Note that the PRODUCT table has referential integrity because every entry in VEND_CODE in the PRODUCT table is either null or a valid value in VEND_CODE in the VENDOR table. Every vendor referred to by a row in the PRODUCT table is a valid vendor.

Finally, a secondary key is defined as a key that is used strictly for data retrieval purposes. Suppose that customer data is stored in a CUSTOMER table in which the customer number is the primary key. Do you think that most customers will remember their numbers? Data retrieval for a customer is easier when the customer’s last name and phone number are used. In that case, the primary key is the customer number; the secondary key is the combination of the customer’s last name and phone number. Keep in mind that a secondary key does not necessarily yield a unique outcome. For example, a customer’s last name and home telephone number could easily yield several matches in which one family lives together and shares a phone line. A less efficient secondary key would be the combination of the last name and zip code; this could yield dozens of matches, which could then be combed for a specific match.

A secondary key’s effectiveness in narrowing down a search depends on how restrictive the key is. For instance, although the secondary key CUS_CITY is legitimate from a database point of view, the attribute values New York or Sydney are not likely to produce a usable return unless you want to examine millions of possible matches. (Of course, CUS_CITY is a better secondary key than CUS_COUNTRY.) Table 3.3 summarizes the various relational database table keys.