In Chapter 1/Module 2.1, Database Systems, you learned that a database stores and manages both data and metadata. You also learned that the DBMS manages and controls access to the data and the database structure. Such an arrangement—placing the DBMS between the application and the database—eliminates most of the file system’s inherent limitations.

The relational data model changed all of that by allowing the designer to focus on the logical representation of the data and its relationships, rather than on the physical storage details. The relational model enables you to view data logically rather than physically.

The practical significance of taking the logical view is that it serves as a reminder of the simple file concept of data storage. Although the use of a table, quite unlike that of a file, has the advantages of structural and data independence, a table does resemble a file from a conceptual point of view.

Because the table plays such a prominent role in the relational model, it deserves a closer look. Therefore, our discussion begins by exploring the details of table structure and contents

Tables and Their Characteristics
The logical view of the relational database is facilitated by the creation of data relationships based on a logical construct known as a relation.

A table is perceived as a two-dimensional structure composed of rows and columns. A table is also called a relation because the relational model’s creator, E. F. Codd, used the two terms as synonyms. You can think of a table as a persistent representation of a logical relation—that is, a relation whose contents can be permanently saved for future use.

As far as the table’s user is concerned, a table contains a group of related entity occurrences—that is, an entity set. For example, a STUDENT table contains a collection of entity occurrences, each representing a student. For that reason, the terms entity set and table are often used interchangeably.

Each field/column in a database can be of various data types. Consider the example below.

Using the STUDENT table shown in Figure 3.1, you can draw the following conclusions corresponding to the points in Table 3.1:

The STUDENT table is perceived to be a two-dimensional structure composed of 8 rows (tuples) and 12 columns (attributes).

Each row in the STUDENT table describes a single entity occurrence within the entity set. (Te entity set is represented by the STUDENT table.) For example, row 4 in Figure 3.1 describes a student named Walter H. Oblonski. Given the table contents, the STUDENT entity set includes eight distinct entities (rows), or students.

Each column represents an attribute, and each column has a distinct name.

All of the values in a column match the attribute’s characteristics. For example, the grade point average (STU_GPA) column contains only STU_GPA entries for each of the table rows. Data must be classifed according to its format and function. Although various DBMSs can support diﬀerent data types, most support at least the following:

Numeric. You can use numeric data to perform meaningful arithmetic procedures.
For example, in Figure 3.1, STU_HRS and STU_GPA are numeric attributes.

Character. Character data, also known as text data or string data, can contain any character or symbol not intended for mathematical manipulation. In Figure 3.1, STU_CLASS and STU_PHONE are examples of character attributes.

Date. Date attributes contain calendar dates stored in a special format known as
the Julian date format. In Figure 3.1, STU_DOB is a date attribute.

Logical. Logical data can only have true or false (yes or no) values. In Figure 3.1, the STU_TRANSFER attribute uses a logical data format.

The column’s range of permissible values is known as its domain. Because the STU_GPA values are limited to the range 0–4, inclusive, the domain is [0,4].

The order of rows and columns is immaterial to the user.

Each table must have a primary key. In general terms, the primary key (PK) is an attribute or combination of attributes that uniquely identifies any given row. In this case, STU_NUM (the student number) is the primary key. Using the data in Figure 3.1, observe that a student’s last name (STU_LNAME) would not be a good primary key because several students have the last name of Smith. Even the combination of the last name and first name (STU_FNAME) would not be an appropriate primary key because more than one student is named John Smith.

Laboratory Activity 1 focuses on the creation of the Database and Tables with attributes/columns having the right data type. Laboratory activity 2 focuses on the insertion, updating, deletion, and selection of table rows.