The data dictionary provides a detailed description of all tables in the database created by the user and designer. Thus, the data dictionary contains at least all of the attribute names and characteristics for each table in the system. In short, the data dictionary contains metadata—data about data. Using the small database presented in Figure 3.3, you might picture its data dictionary as shown in Table 3.6.

The data dictionary is sometimes described as “the database designer’s database”because it records the design decisions about tables and their structures.

Like the data dictionary, the system catalog contains metadata. The system catalog can be described as a detailed system data dictionary that describes all objects within the database, including data about table names, table’s creator and creation date, number of columns in each table, data type corresponding to each column, index filenames, index creators, authorized users, and access privileges. Because the system catalog contains all required data dictionary information, the terms system catalog and data dictionary are often used interchangeably. In fact, current relational database software generally provides only a system catalog, from which the designer’s data dictionary information may be derived.

The system catalog is actually a system-created database whose tables store the user/designer-created database characteristics and contents. Therefore, the system catalog tables can be queried just like any user/designer-created table.

In effect, the system catalog automatically produces database documentation. As new tables are added to the database, that documentation also allows the RDBMS to check for and eliminate homonyms and synonyms. In general terms, homonyms are similar-sounding words with different meanings, such as boar and bore, or a word with different meanings, such as fair (which means “just” in some contexts and “festival” in others). In a database context, the word homonym indicates the use of the same name to label different attributes. For example, you might use C_NAME to label a customer name attribute in a CUSTOMER table and use C_NAME = to label a consultant name attribute in a CONSULTANT table. To lessen confusion, you should avoid database homonyms; the data dictionary is very useful in this regard.

In a database context, a synonym is the opposite of a homonym, and indicates the use of different names to describe the same attribute. For example, car and auto refer to the same object. Synonyms must be avoided whenever possible.