Background Information: Structures in C++

In C++, a structure is the same as a class except for a few differences. The most important of them is security. A Structure is not secure and cannot hide its implementation details from the end user while a class is secure and can hide its programming and designing details. Following are the points that expound on this difference:

1) Members of a class are private by default and members of a struct are public by default.

For example program 1 fails in compilation and program 2 works fine.

// Program 1 #include <iostream>
using namespace std class Test {     int x; // x is private }; int main() {    Test t;   t.x = 20; // compiler error because x is private    return 0; }
BUT...if we use a struct instead of class we get a different result

// Program 2#include<iostream>
using namespace std;
struct Test {   int x; // x is public};int main(){   Test t;   t.x = 20; // works fine because x is public   return 0;}
2) When deriving a struct from a class/struct, default access-specifier for a base class/struct is public. And when deriving a class, default access specifier is private.
For example program 3 fails in compilation and program 4 works fine.
// Program 3
#include <iostream>
using namespace.std;

class Base {
public:
int x;
};

class Derived : Base { }; // is equilalent to class Derived : private Base {}

int main()
{
Derived d;
d.x = 20; // compiler error becuase inheritance is private

return 0;
}
So...if we use a struct instead of class we get a different result

// Program 4
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

class Base {
public:
int x;
};

struct Derived : Base { }; // is equilalent to struct Derived : public Base {}

int main()
{
Derived d;
d.x = 20; // works fine becuase inheritance is public
return 0;
}