The List ADT
A list is a linear collection, like a stack and queue, but more flexible: adding and removing elements from a list does not have to happen at one end or the other

We will examine three types of list collections:

Ordered lists

Unordered lists

Indexed lists

Order List

Its elements are ordered by some inherent characteristic of the elements

Examples:

Names in alphabetical order

Numeric scores in ascending order

So, the elements themselves determine where they are stored in the list

Unordered List

The order of the elements in the list is not based on a characteristic of the elements, but is determined by the user of the list

A new element can be put

on the front of the list

or on the rear of the list

or after a particular element already in the list

Examples: shopping list, to-do list, …

Indexed List

Elements are referenced by their numeric position in the list, called its index.

It’s the position in the list that is important, and the user can determine the order that the items go in the list.

Every time the list changes, the position (index) of an element may change.

Example: current first-place holder in the bobsled race.

List Operations
Operations common to all list types include :

Removing elements in various ways

Checking the status of the list (isEmpty, size)

Iterating through the elements in the list (more on this later!)

The key differences between the list types involve the way elements are added:

To an ordered list?

To an unordered list?

To an indexed list?

Common List Operations

List Implementation using Arrays
Container is an array. Fix one end of the list at index 0 and shift as needed when an element is added or removed.

Considerations:

Is a shift needed when an element is added?

at the front?

somewhere in the middle?

at the end?

Is a shift needed when an element is removed

from the front?

from somewhere in the middle?

from the end?

Attribution: CS1027B/Computer Science Fundamentals (Winter 2021)

Linked Lists vs. Arrays
Advantages over Arrays

Dynamic size

Ease of insertion/deletion

Drawbacks:

Random access is not allowed. We have to access elements sequentially starting from the first node. So we cannot do binary search with linked lists efficiently with its default implementation. Read about it here.

Extra memory space for a pointer is required with each element of the list.

Not cache friendly. Since array elements are contiguous locations, there is locality of reference which is not there in case of linked lists.

Representation:

A linked list is represented by a pointer to the first node of the linked list. The first node is called the head. If the linked list is empty, then the value of the head is NULL.
Each node in a list consists of at least two parts:

Data

Pointer (Or Reference) to the next node

Attribution: " Linked Lists" by Patrick McClanahan, LibreTexts is licensed under CC BY-SA .
Analysis of Operations
In both array and linked implementations, many operations are similar in efficiency

Most are O(1) , except when shifting or searching need to occur, in which case they are order O(n).

In particular situations, the frequency of the need for particular operations may guide the use of one approach over another

Attribution: CS1027B/Computer Science Fundamentals (Winter 2021)