A. Bubble Sort
Thebubble sortmakes multiple passes through an array. It compares adjacent items and exchanges those that are out of order. Each pass through the array places the next largest value in its proper place. In essence, each item “bubbles” up to the location where it belongs.

Figure below shows the first pass of a bubble sort. The shaded items are being compared to see if they are out of order. If there arenitems in the array, then there arepairs of items that need to be compared on the first pass. It is important to note that once the largest value in the array is part of a pair, it will continually be moved along until the pass is complete.

At the start of the second pass, the largest value is now in place. There are n−1 items left to sort, meaning that there will be n−2 pairs. Since each pass places the next largest value in place, the total number of passes necessary will be n−1. After completing the n−1 passes, the smallest item must be in the correct position with no further processing required. Below we can see the complete bubbleSort function. It takes the array as a parameter, and modifies it by swapping items as necessary.
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

//function goes through list sorting adjacent values as it bubbles
//the largest value to the top.
vector<int> bubbleSort(vector<int> avector) { //the vector for bubble sort
for (int passnum = avector.size()-1; passnum > 0; passnum -= 1) {
for (int i = 0; i < passnum; i++) {
if (avector[i] > avector[i+1]) {
int temp = avector[i];
avector[i] = avector[i+1];
avector[i+1] = temp;
}
}
}
return avector;
}

int main() {
// Vector initialized using a static array
static const int arr[] = {54,26,93,17,77,31,44,55,20};
vector<int> avector (arr, arr + sizeof(arr) / sizeof(arr[0]) );

vector<int> bvector = bubbleSort(avector);
for (unsigned int i = 0; i < bvector.size(); i++) {
cout<<bvector[i]<< " ";
}
return 0;
}
Typically, swapping two elements in an array requires a temporary storage location (an additional memory location). A code fragment such as

temp=alist[i];alist[i]=alist[j];alist[j]=temp;

will exchange theithandjthitems in the array. Without the temporary storage, one of the values would be overwritten.

Lines 5-7 in the code perform the exchange of the ii and (i+1)th(i+1)th items using the three–step procedure described earlier. Note that we could also have used the simultaneous assignment to swap the items.

selection and bubble sort: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ev8mz3p90g8&t=150s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ev8mz3p90g8&t=150s)

This visualization allows you to step through the algorithm. Orange bars represent the elements being looked at.

To analyze the bubble sort, we should note that regardless of how the items are arranged in the initial array, n−1 passes will be made to sort an array of size n. The table below shows the number of comparisons for each pass. The total number of comparisons is the sum of the first n−1 integers. Recall that the sum of the first n integers is . The sum of the first n−1 integers is , which is . This is still  comparisons. In the best case, if the array is already ordered, no exchanges will be made. However, in the worst case, every comparison will cause an exchange. On average, we exchange half of the time.

Pass

Comparisons

1

n−1n−1

2

n−2n−2

3

n−3n−3

…

…

n−1

1

A bubble sort is often considered the most inefficient sorting method since it must exchange items before the final location is known. These “wasted” exchange operations are very costly. However, because the bubble sort makes passes through the entire unsorted portion of the array, it has the capability to do something most sorting algorithms cannot. In particular, if during a pass there are no exchanges, then we know that the array must be sorted. A bubble sort can be modified to stop early if it finds that the array has become sorted. This means that for arrays that require just a few passes, a bubble sort may have an advantage in that it will recognize the sorted array and stop. The code below shows this modification, which is often referred to as the short bubble.
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

using namespace std;

vector<int> shortBubbleSort(vector<int> avector){ //the vector for bubble sort
bool exchanges = true;
int passnum = avector.size();
//while vector size is greater than 0 and exchanges = true
while (passnum > 0 && exchanges) {
exchanges = false;
//loops through vector, exchanging values until it reaches the end of vector.
for(int i = 0; i < passnum; i++){
if(avector[i] > avector[i+1]){
exchanges = true;
int temp = avector[i];
avector[i] = avector[i+1];
avector[i+1] = temp;
}
}
//subtracts from the passnum variable so that the next passthrough is one less
//than the previous, because the largest value has already 'bubbled' all the way up.
passnum = passnum - 1;
}
return avector;
}

int main() {
// Vector initialized using a static array
static const int arr[] = {20,30,40,90,50,60,70,80,110,100};
vector<int> avector (arr, arr+ sizeof(arr)/sizeof(arr[0])); //intializes vector

vector<int> bvector = shortBubbleSort(avector);

for(unsigned int i = 0; i < bvector.size(); i++){
cout<< bvector[i] << " ";
}
return 0;
}

B. Selection Sort
Theselection sortimproves on the bubble sort by making only one exchange for every pass through the first part of the vector. We will call this a step. In order to do this, a selection sort looks for the largest value as it makes a partial pass and, after completing the partial pass, places it in the proper location, ending the step. As with a bubble sort, after the first step, the largest item is in the correct place. After the second step, the next largest is in place. This process continues and requiresn−1n−1steps to sortnitems, since the final item must be in place after the(n−1)step.

On each step, the largest remaining item is selected and then placed in its proper location. The first pass places 93, the second pass places 77, the third places 55, and so on. The function is shown below.
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;
//function that sorts through values in vector through selection sort
vector<int> selectionSort(vector<int> avector) {
for (int fillslot = (avector.size() - 1); fillslot >= 0; fillslot--) {
int positionOfMax = 0;
for (int location = 1; location < fillslot + 1; location++) {
if (avector[location] > avector[positionOfMax]) {
positionOfMax = location;
}
}

int temp = avector[fillslot];
avector[fillslot] = avector[positionOfMax];
avector[positionOfMax] = temp;
}
return avector;
}

int main() {
// Vector initialized using a static array
static const int arr[] = {54, 26, 93, 17, 77, 31, 44, 55, 20};
vector<int> avector (arr, arr + sizeof(arr) / sizeof(arr[0]) );

// Call to the selectionSort function
vector<int> updatedAvector = selectionSort(avector);

// print the vector
for (unsigned int i = 0; i < updatedAvector.size(); i++) {
cout << updatedAvector[i] << " ";
}
cout << endl;

return 0;
}
The following visualization shows selection sort in action. Each pass compares the bars in sequential order. The smallest bar is selected on each pass and is set as the minimum, represented in orange. Every remaining bar is then compared to the minimum. If the bar is larger, it is represented in blue, if it is smaller, it becomes the new orange bar. After each pass, a counter will increment which bar in our container will start with. This increment is represented by a thin black line falling before the bar to be started at.

You may see that the selection sort makes the same number of comparisons as the bubble sort and is therefore also . However, due to the reduction in the number of exchanges, the selection sort typically executes faster in benchmark studies.

C. Insertion Sort
The insertion sort, although still , works in a slightly different way. It always maintains a sorted subvector in the lower positions of the vector. Each new item is then “inserted” back into the previous subvector such that the sorted subvector is one item larger. Figure below shows the insertion sorting process. The shaded items represent the ordered subvectors as the algorithm makes each pass.

We begin by assuming that a vector with one item (position 0) is already sorted. On each pass, one for each item 1 throughn−1, the current item is checked against those in the already sorted subvector. As we look back into the already sorted subvector, we shift those items that are greater to the right. When we reach a smaller item or the end of the subvector, the current item can be inserted.

Figure below shows the fifth pass in detail. At this point in the algorithm, a sorted subvector of five items consisting of 17, 26, 54, 77, and 93 exists. We want to insert 31 back into the already sorted items. The first comparison against 93 causes 93 to be shifted to the right. 77 and 54 are also shifted. When the item 26 is encountered, the shifting process stops and 31 is placed in the open position. Now we have a sorted subvector of six items.

The implementation ofinsertionSort below shows that there are againn−1passes to sortnitems. The iteration starts at position 1 and moves through position n−1, as these are the items that need to be inserted back into the sorted subvectors. Line 8 performs the shift operation that moves a value up one position in the vector, making room behind it for the insertion. Remember that this is not a complete exchange as was performed in the previous algorithms.

The maximum number of comparisons for an insertion sort is the sum of the first n−1integers. Again, this is. However, in the best case, only one comparison needs to be done on each pass. This would be the case for an already sorted vector.

One note about shifting versus exchanging is also important. In general, a shift operation requires approximately a third of the processing work of an exchange since only one assignment is performed. In benchmark studies, insertion sort will show very good performance.
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

vector<int> insertionSort(vector<int> avector) {
for (unsigned int index=1; index<avector.size(); index++) {

int currentvalue = avector[index];
int position = index;

while (position>0 && avector[position-1]>currentvalue) {
avector[position] = avector[position-1];
position--;
}

avector[position] = currentvalue;
}

return avector;
}

int main() {
// Vector initialized using a static array
static const int arr[] = {54, 26, 93, 17, 77, 31, 44, 55, 20};
vector<int> avector (arr, arr + sizeof(arr) / sizeof(arr[0]) );

avector = insertionSort(avector);

//prints the sorted vector
for (unsigned int i=0; i<avector.size(); i++) {
cout << avector[i] << " ";;
}
cout << endl;

return 0;
}
The visualization below allows you to examine the individual steps of the algorithm at a slower pace. Bars that are orange indicate that it is being compared to items to the left. Bars that are blue indicate that it is one of the items currently being compared against the orange bar.

insertion sorting: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JU767SDMDvA

"Problem Solving with Algorithms and Data Structures using C++" by Bradley N. Miller, David L. Ranum, and Janice L. Pearce is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.